"Subpart II — Improving Coverage 

"SEC. 2711 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-ll]. NO LIFETIME OR ANNUAL LIMITS. 

[Replaced by section 10101(aj\ 
"(a) Prohibition. — 

"(1) In general. — A group health plan and a health insur- 
ance issuer offering group or individual health insurance cov- 
erage may not establish — 

"(A) lifetime limits on the dollar value of benefits for 
any participant or beneficiary; or 

"(B) except as provided in paragraph (2), annual limits 
on the dollar value of benefits for any participant or bene- 
ficiary. 

"(2) Annual limits prior to 2014. — With respect to plan 
years beginning prior to January 1, 2014, a group health plan 
and a health insurance issuer offering group or individual 
health insurance coverage may only establish a restricted an- 
nual limit on the dollar value of benefits for any participant or 
beneficiary with respect to the scope of benefits that are essen- 
tial health benefits under section 1302(b) of the Patient Protec- 
tion and Affordable Care Act, as determined by the Secretary. 
In defining the term 'restricted annual limit' for purposes of 
the preceding sentence, the Secretary shall ensure that access 
to needed services is made available with a minimal impact on 
premiums. 

"(b) Per Beneficiary Limits. — Subsection (a) shall not be con- 
strued to prevent a group health plan or health insurance coverage 
from placing annual or lifetime per beneficiary limits on specific 
covered benefits that are not essential health benefits under section 
1302(b) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, to the 
extent that such limits are otherwise permitted under Federal or 
State law. 

"SEC. 2712 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-12]. PROHIBITION ON RESCISSIONS. 

"A group health plan and a health insurance issuer offering 
group or individual health insurance coverage shall not rescind 
such plan or coverage with respect to an enrollee once the enrollee 
is covered under such plan or coverage involved, except that this 
section shall not apply to a covered individual who has performed 
an act or practice that constitutes fraud or makes an intentional 
misrepresentation of material fact as prohibited by the terms of the 
plan or coverage. Such plan or coverage may not be cancelled ex- 
cept with prior notice to the enrollee, and only as permitted under 
section 2702(c) or 2742(b). 

"SEC. 2713 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-13]. COVERAGE OF PREVENTIVE HEALTH 
SERVICES. 

"(a) In General. — A group health plan and a health insurance 
issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage shall, 
at a minimum provide coverage for and shall not impose any cost 
sharing requirements for — 

"(1) evidence-based items or services that have in effect a 
rating of A' or 'B' in the current recommendations of the 
United States Preventive Services Task Force; 

June 9, 2010 



15 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1001X2714 PHSA 



"(2) immunizations that have in effect a recommendation 
from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices of the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention with respect to the 
individual involved; and 

"(3) with respect to infants, children, and adolescents, evi- 
dence-informed preventive care and screenings provided for in 
the comprehensive guidelines supported by the Health Re- 
sources and Services Administration. 

"(4) with respect to women, such additional preventive 
care and screenings not described in paragraph (1) as provided 
for in comprehensive guidelines supported by the Health Re- 
sources and Services Administration for purposes of this para- 
graph. 

"(5) for the purposes of this Act, and for the purposes of 
any other provision of law, the current recommendations of the 
United States Preventive Service Task Force regarding breast 
cancer screening, mammography, and prevention shall be con- 
sidered the most current other than those issued in or around 
November 2009. 

Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit a plan or 
issuer from providing coverage for services in addition to those rec- 
ommended by United States Preventive Services Task Force or to 
deny coverage for services that are not recommended by such Task 
Force. 

"(b) Interval. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall establish a min- 
imum interval between the date on which a recommendation 
described in subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) or a guideline under sub- 
section (a)(3) is issued and the plan year with respect to which 
the requirement described in subsection (a) is effective with re- 
spect to the service described in such recommendation or 
guideline. 

"(2) Minimum. — The interval described in paragraph (1) 
shall not be less than 1 year. 

"(c) Value-based Insurance Design. — The Secretary may de- 
velop guidelines to permit a group health plan and a health insur- 
ance issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage 
to utilize value-based insurance designs. 

"SEC. 2714 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-14]. EXTENSION OF DEPENDENT COV- 
ERAGE. 

"(a) In General. — A group health plan and a health insurance 
issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage that 
provides dependent coverage of children shall continue to make 
such coverage available for an adult child until the child turns 26 
years of age. Nothing in this section shall require a health plan or 
a health insurance issuer described in the preceding sentence to 
make coverage available for a child of a child receiving dependent 
coverage. [As revised by section 2301(b) of HCERAJ 

"(b) Regulations. — The Secretary shall promulgate regula- 
tions to define the dependents to which coverage shall be made 
available under subsection (a). 

"(c) Rule of Construction. — Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to modify the definition of 'dependent' as used in the In- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1001N2715 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



16 



ternal Revenue Code of 1986 with respect to the tax treatment of 
the cost of coverage. 

"SEC. 2715 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-15]. DEVELOPMENT AND UTILIZATION OF 
UNIFORM EXPLANATION OF COVERAGE DOCUMENTS AND 
STANDARDIZED DEFINITIONS. 

"(a) In General. — Not later than 12 months after the date of 
enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, the 
Secretary shall develop standards for use by a group health plan 
and a health insurance issuer offering group or individual health 
insurance coverage, in compiling and providing to applicants, en- 
rollees, and policyholders or certificate holders a summary of bene- 
fits and coverage explanation that accurately describes the benefits 
and coverage under the applicable plan or coverage. In developing 
such standards, the Secretary shall consult with the National Asso- 
ciation of Insurance Commissioners (referred to in this section as 
the 'NAIC'), a working group composed of representatives of health 
insurance-related consumer advocacy organizations, health insur- 
ance issuers, health care professionals, patient advocates including 
those representing individuals with limited English proficiency, 
and other qualified individuals. [As revised by section 10101(b)~\ 

"(b) Requirements. — The standards for the summary of bene- 
fits and coverage developed under subsection (a) shall provide for 
the following: 

"(1) Appearance. — The standards shall ensure that the 
summary of benefits and coverage is presented in a uniform 
format that does not exceed 4 pages in length and does not in- 
clude print smaller than 12-point font. 

"(2) Language. — The standards shall ensure that the sum- 
mary is presented in a culturally and linguistically appropriate 
manner and utilizes terminology understandable by the aver- 
age plan enrollee. 

"(3) Contents. — The standards shall ensure that the sum- 
mary of benefits and coverage includes — 

"(A) uniform definitions of standard insurance terms 

and medical terms (consistent with subsection (g)) so that 

consumers may compare health insurance coverage and 

understand the terms of coverage (or exception to such 

coverage); 

"(B) a description of the coverage, including cost shar- 
ing for — 

"(i) each of the categories of the essential health 
benefits described in subparagraphs (A) through (J) of 
section 1302(b)(1) of the Patient Protection and Afford- 
able Care Act; and 

"(ii) other benefits, as identified by the Secretary; 
"(C) the exceptions, reductions, and limitations on cov- 
erage; 

"(D) the cost-sharing provisions, including deductible, 
coinsurance, and co-payment obligations; 

"(E) the renewability and continuation of coverage pro- 
visions; 

"(F) a coverage facts label that includes examples to il- 
lustrate common benefits scenarios, including pregnancy 
and serious or chronic medical conditions and related cost 

June 9, 2010 



17 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1001X2715 PHSA 



sharing, such scenarios to be based on recognized clinical 
practice guidelines; 

"(G) a statement of whether the plan or coverage — 

"(i) provides minimum essential coverage (as de- 
fined under section 5000A(f) of the Internal Revenue 
Code 1986); and 

"(ii) ensures that the plan or coverage share of the 
total allowed costs of benefits provided under the plan 
or coverage is not less than 60 percent of such costs; 
"(H) a statement that the outline is a summary of the 
policy or certificate and that the coverage document itself 
should be consulted to determine the governing contrac- 
tual provisions; and 

"(I) a contact number for the consumer to call with ad- 
ditional questions and an Internet web address where a 
copy of the actual individual coverage policy or group cer- 
tificate of coverage can be reviewed and obtained. 
"(c) Periodic Review and Updating. — The Secretary shall pe- 
riodically review and update, as appropriate, the standards devel- 
oped under this section. 

"(d) Requirement To Provide. — 

"(1) In general. — Not later than 24 months after the date 
of enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act, each entity described in paragraph (3) shall provide, prior 
to any enrollment restriction, a summary of benefits and cov- 
erage explanation pursuant to the standards developed by the 
Secretary under subsection (a) to — 

"(A) an applicant at the time of application; 
"(B) an enrollee prior to the time of enrollment or re- 
enrollment, as applicable; and 

"(C) a policyholder or certificate holder at the time of 
issuance of the policy or delivery of the certificate. 
"(2) Compliance. — An entity described in paragraph (3) is 
deemed to be in compliance with this section if the summary 
of benefits and coverage described in subsection (a) is provided 
in paper or electronic form. 

"(3) Entities in general. — An entity described in this 
paragraph is — 

"(A) a health insurance issuer (including a group 
health plan that is not a self-insured plan) offering health 
insurance coverage within the United States; or 

"(B) in the case of a self-insured group health plan, 
the plan sponsor or designated administrator of the plan 
(as such terms are defined in section 3(16) of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974). 
"(4) Notice of modifications. — If a group health plan or 
health insurance issuer makes any material modification in 
any of the terms of the plan or coverage involved (as defined 
for purposes of section 102 of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974) that is not reflected in the most recently 
provided summary of benefits and coverage, the plan or issuer 
shall provide notice of such modification to enrollees not later 
than 60 days prior to the date on which such modification will 
become effective. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1001X2715A PHSA PPACA (Consolidated) 



18 



"(e) Preemption. — The standards developed under subsection 
(a) shall preempt any related State standards that require a sum- 
mary of benefits and coverage that provides less information to 
consumers than that required to be provided under this section, as 
determined by the Secretary. 

"(f) Failure To Provide. — An entity described in subsection 
(d)(3) that willfully fails to provide the information required under 
this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for 
each such failure. Such failure with respect to each enrollee shall 
constitute a separate offense for purposes of this subsection. 
"(g) Development of Standard Definitions. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall, by regulation, pro- 
vide for the development of standards for the definitions of 
terms used in health insurance coverage, including the insur- 
ance-related terms described in paragraph (2) and the medical 
terms described in paragraph (3). 

"(2) Insurance-related terms. — The insurance-related 
terms described in this paragraph are premium, deductible, co- 
insurance, co-payment, out-of-pocket limit, preferred provider, 
non-preferred provider, out-of-network co-payments, UCR 
(usual, customary and reasonable) fees, excluded services, 
grievance and appeals, and such other terms as the Secretary 
determines are important to define so that consumers may 
compare health insurance coverage and understand the terms 
of their coverage. 

"(3) Medical terms. — The medical terms described in this 
paragraph are hospitalization, hospital outpatient care, emer- 
gency room care, physician services, prescription drug cov- 
erage, durable medical equipment, home health care, skilled 
nursing care, rehabilitation services, hospice services, emer- 
gency medical transportation, and such other terms as the Sec- 
retary determines are important to define so that consumers 
may compare the medical benefits offered by health insurance 
and understand the extent of those medical benefits (or excep- 
tions to those benefits). 

"SEC. 2715A [42 U.S.C. 300gg-15a]. PROVISION OF ADDITIONAL INFOR- 
MATION. 

"[As added by section 10101(c)~\ A group health plan and a 
health insurance issuer offering group or individual health insur- 
ance coverage shall comply with the provisions of section 1311(e)(3) 
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, except that a 
plan or coverage that is not offered through an Exchange shall only 
be required to submit the information required to the Secretary 
and the State insurance commissioner, and make such information 
available to the public. 

"SEC. 2716 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-16]. PROHIBITION ON DISCRIMINATION IN 
FAVOR OF HIGHLY COMPENSATED INDIVIDUALS. 

[Replaced by section 10101(d)~\ 

"(a) In General. — A group health plan (other than a self-in- 
sured plan) shall satisfy the requirements of section 105(h)(2) of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to prohibition on dis- 
crimination in favor of highly compensated individuals). 

"(b) Rules and Definitions. — For purposes of this section — 

June 9, 2010 



19 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1001X2717 PHSA 



"(1) Certain rules to apply. — Rules similar to the rules 
contained in paragraphs (3), (4), and (8) of section 105(h) of 
such Code shall apply. 

"(2) Highly compensated individual. — The term 'highly 
compensated individual' has the meaning given such term by 
section 105(h)(5) of such Code. 

"SEC. 2717 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-17]. ENSURING THE QUALITY OF CARE. 

"(a) Quality Reporting. — 

"(1) In general. — Not later than 2 years after the date of 
enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 
the Secretary, in consultation with experts in health care qual- 
ity and stakeholders, shall develop reporting requirements for 
use by a group health plan, and a health insurance issuer of- 
fering group or individual health insurance coverage, with re- 
spect to plan or coverage benefits and health care provider re- 
imbursement structures that — 

"(A) improve health outcomes through the implemen- 
tation of activities such as quality reporting, effective case 
management, care coordination, chronic disease manage- 
ment, and medication and care compliance initiatives, in- 
cluding through the use of the medical homes model as de- 
fined for purposes of section 3602 of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act, for treatment or services under 
the plan or coverage; 

"(B) implement activities to prevent hospital readmis- 
sions through a comprehensive program for hospital dis- 
charge that includes patient-centered education and coun- 
seling, comprehensive discharge planning, and post dis- 
charge reinforcement by an appropriate health care profes- 
sional; 

"(C) implement activities to improve patient safety 
and reduce medical errors through the appropriate use of 
best clinical practices, evidence based medicine, and health 
information technology under the plan or coverage; and 

"(D) implement wellness and health promotion activi- 
ties. 

"(2) Reporting requirements. — 

"(A) In general. — A group health plan and a health 
insurance issuer offering group or individual health insur- 
ance coverage shall annually submit to the Secretary, and 
to enrollees under the plan or coverage, a report on wheth- 
er the benefits under the plan or coverage satisfy the ele- 
ments described in subparagraphs (A) through (D) of para- 
graph (1). 

"(B) Timing of reports. — A report under subpara- 
graph (A) shall be made available to an enrollee under the 
plan or coverage during each open enrollment period. 

"(C) Availability of reports. — The Secretary shall 
make reports submitted under subparagraph (A) available 
to the public through an Internet website. 

"(D) Penalties. — In developing the reporting require- 
ments under paragraph (1), the Secretary may develop and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1001X2717 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



20 



impose appropriate penalties for non-compliance with such 
requirements. 

"(E) Exceptions. — In developing the reporting re- 
quirements under paragraph (1), the Secretary may pro- 
vide for exceptions to such requirements for group health 
plans and health insurance issuers that substantially meet 
the goals of this section. 
"(b) Wellness and Prevention Programs. — For purposes of 
subsection (a)(1)(D), wellness and health promotion activities may 
include personalized wellness and prevention services, which are 
coordinated, maintained or delivered by a health care provider, a 
wellness and prevention plan manager, or a health, wellness or 
prevention services organization that conducts health risk assess- 
ments or offers ongoing face-to-face, telephonic or web-based inter- 
vention efforts for each of the program's participants, and which 
may include the following wellness and prevention efforts: 
"(1) Smoking cessation. 
"(2) Weight management. 
"(3) Stress management. 
"(4) Physical fitness. 
"(5) Nutrition. 

"(6) Heart disease prevention. 
"(7) Healthy lifestyle support. 
"(8) Diabetes prevention. 
"(c) Protection of Second Amendment Gun Rights. — [As 
added by section 10101(e)(2)] 

"(1) Wellness and prevention programs. — A wellness 
and health promotion activity implemented under subsection 
(a)(1)(D) may not require the disclosure or collection of any in- 
formation relating to — 

"(A) the presence or storage of a lawfully-possessed 
firearm or ammunition in the residence or on the property 
of an individual; or 

"(B) the lawful use, possession, or storage of a firearm 
or ammunition by an individual. 

"(2) Limitation on data collection. — None of the au- 
thorities provided to the Secretary under the Patient Protec- 
tion and Affordable Care Act or an amendment made by that 
Act shall be construed to authorize or may be used for the col- 
lection of any information relating to — 

"(A) the lawful ownership or possession of a firearm or 

ammunition; 

"(B) the lawful use of a firearm or ammunition; or 
"(C) the lawful storage of a firearm or ammunition. 

"(3) Limitation on databases or data banks. — None of 
the authorities provided to the Secretary under the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act or an amendment made by 
that Act shall be construed to authorize or may be used to 
maintain records of individual ownership or possession of a 
firearm or ammunition. 

"(4) Limitation on determination of premium rates or 
eligibility for health insurance. — A premium rate may not 
be increased, health insurance coverage may not be denied, 
and a discount, rebate, or reward offered for participation in a 

June 9, 2010 



21 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1001X2718 PHSA 



wellness program may not be reduced or withheld under any 
health benefit plan issued pursuant to or in accordance with 
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act or an amend- 
ment made by that Act on the basis of, or on reliance upon — 
"(A) the lawful ownership or possession of a firearm or 
ammunition; or 

"(B) the lawful use or storage of a firearm or ammuni- 
tion. 

"(5) Limitation on data collection requirements for 
INDIVIDUALS. — No individual shall be required to disclose any 
information under any data collection activity authorized 
under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act or an 
amendment made by that Act relating to — 

"(A) the lawful ownership or possession of a firearm or 
ammunition; or 

"(B) the lawful use, possession, or storage of a firearm 
or ammunition. 

"(d) Regulations. — Not later than 2 years after the date of en- 
actment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, the Sec- 
retary shall promulgate regulations that provide criteria for deter- 
mining whether a reimbursement structure is described in sub- 
section (a). 

"(e) Study and Report. — Not later than 180 days after the 
date on which regulations are promulgated under subsection (c), 
the Government Accountability Office shall review such regulations 
and conduct a study and submit to the Committee on Health, Edu- 
cation, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on 
Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives a report re- 
garding the impact the activities under this section have had on 
the quality and cost of health care. 

"SEC. 2718 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-18]. BRINGING DOWN THE COST OF HEALTH 
CARE COVERAGE. 

[Replaced by section 10101(f)\ 

"(a) Clear Accounting for Costs. — A health insurance 
issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage (in- 
cluding a grandfathered health plan) shall, with respect to each 
plan year, submit to the Secretary a report concerning the ratio of 
the incurred loss (or incurred claims) plus the loss adjustment ex- 
pense (or change in contract reserves) to earned premiums. Such 
report shall include the percentage of total premium revenue, after 
accounting for collections or receipts for risk adjustment and risk 
corridors and payments of reinsurance, that such coverage ex- 
pends — 

"(1) on reimbursement for clinical services provided to en- 
rollees under such coverage; 

"(2) for activities that improve health care quality; and 
"(3) on all other non-claims costs, including an explanation 
of the nature of such costs, and excluding Federal and State 
taxes and licensing or regulatory fees. 
The Secretary shall make reports received under this section avail- 
able to the public on the Internet website of the Department of 
Health and Human Services. 

"(b) Ensuring That Consumers Receive Value for Their 
Premium Payments. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1001N2718 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



22 



"(1) Requirement to provide value for premium pay- 
ments. — 

"(A) Requirement. — Beginning not later than January 
1, 2011, a health insurance issuer offering group or indi- 
vidual health insurance coverage (including a grand- 
fathered health plan) shall, with respect to each plan year, 
provide an annual rebate to each enrollee under such cov- 
erage, on a pro rata basis, if the ratio of the amount of pre- 
mium revenue expended by the issuer on costs described 
in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a) to the total 
amount of premium revenue (excluding Federal and State 
taxes and licensing or regulatory fees and after accounting 
for payments or receipts for risk adjustment, risk cor- 
ridors, and reinsurance under sections 1341, 1342, and 
1343 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act) for 
the plan year (except as provided in subparagraph (B)(ii)), 
is less than — 

"(i) with respect to a health insurance issuer offer- 
ing coverage in the large group market, 85 percent, or 
such higher percentage as a State may by regulation 
determine; or 

"(ii) with respect to a health insurance issuer of- 
fering coverage in the small group market or in the in- 
dividual market, 80 percent, or such higher percentage 
as a State may by regulation determine, except that 
the Secretary may adjust such percentage with respect 
to a State if the Secretary determines that the applica- 
tion of such 80 percent may destabilize the individual 
market in such State. 
"(B) Rebate amount. — 

"(i) Calculation of amount. — The total amount 
of an annual rebate required under this paragraph 
shall be in an amount equal to the product of — 

"(I) the amount by which the percentage de- 
scribed in clause (i) or (ii) of subparagraph (A) ex- 
ceeds the ratio described in such subparagraph; 
and 

"(II) the total amount of premium revenue 
(excluding Federal and State taxes and licensing 
or regulatory fees and after accounting for pay- 
ments or receipts for risk adjustment, risk cor- 
ridors, and reinsurance under sections 1341, 1342, 
and 1343 of the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act) for such plan year, 
"(ii) Calculation based on average ratio. — Be- 
ginning on January 1, 2014, the determination made 
under subparagraph (A) for the year involved shall be 
based on the averages of the premiums expended on 
the costs described in such subparagraph and total 
premium revenue for each of the previous 3 years for 
the plan. 

"(2) Consideration in setting percentages. — In deter- 
mining the percentages under paragraph (1), a State shall seek 
to ensure adequate participation by health insurance issuers, 

June 9, 2010 



23 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1001X2719 PHSA 



competition in the health insurance market in the State, and 
value for consumers so that premiums are used for clinical 
services and quality improvements. 

"(3) Enforcement. — The Secretary shall promulgate regu- 
lations for enforcing the provisions of this section and may pro- 
vide for appropriate penalties. 

"(c) Definitions. — Not later than December 31, 2010, and sub- 
ject to the certification of the Secretary, the National Association 
of Insurance Commissioners shall establish uniform definitions of 
the activities reported under subsection (a) and standardized meth- 
odologies for calculating measures of such activities, including defi- 
nitions of which activities, and in what regard such activities, con- 
stitute activities described in subsection (a)(2). Such methodologies 
shall be designed to take into account the special circumstances of 
smaller plans, different types of plans, and newer plans. 

"(d) Adjustments. — The Secretary may adjust the rates de- 
scribed in subsection (b) if the Secretary determines appropriate on 
account of the volatility of the individual market due to the estab- 
lishment of State Exchanges. 

"(e) Standard Hospital Charges. — Each hospital operating 
within the United States shall for each year establish (and update) 
and make public (in accordance with guidelines developed by the 
Secretary) a list of the hospital's standard charges for items and 
services provided by the hospital, including for diagnosis-related 
groups established under section 1886(d)(4) of the Social Security 
Act. 

"SEC. 2719 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-19]. APPEALS PROCESS. 

[Replaced by section 10101(gJ\ 
"(a) Internal Claims Appeals. — 

"(1) In general. — A group health plan and a health insur- 
ance issuer offering group or individual health insurance cov- 
erage shall implement an effective appeals process for appeals 
of coverage determinations and claims, under which the plan 
or issuer shall, at a minimum — 

"(A) have in effect an internal claims appeal process; 
"(B) provide notice to enrollees, in a culturally and lin- 
guistically appropriate manner, of available internal and 
external appeals processes, and the availability of any ap- 
plicable office of health insurance consumer assistance or 
ombudsman established under section 2793 to assist such 
enrollees with the appeals processes; and 

"(C) allow an enrollee to review their file, to present 
evidence and testimony as part of the appeals process, and 
to receive continued coverage pending the outcome of the 
appeals process. 

"(2) Established processes. — To comply with paragraph 

(D— 

"(A) a group health plan and a health insurance issuer 
offering group health coverage shall provide an internal 
claims and appeals process that initially incorporates the 
claims and appeals procedures (including urgent claims) 
set forth at section 2560.503-1 of title 29, Code of Federal 
Regulations, as published on November 21, 2000 (65 Fed. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1001X2719A PHSA PPACA (Consolidated) 



24 



Reg. 70256), and shall update such process in accordance 
with any standards established by the Secretary of Labor 
for such plans and issuers; and 

"(B) a health insurance issuer offering individual 
health coverage, and any other issuer not subject to sub- 
paragraph (A), shall provide an internal claims and ap- 
peals process that initially incorporates the claims and ap- 
peals procedures set forth under applicable law (as in ex- 
istence on the date of enactment of this section), and shall 
update such process in accordance with any standards es- 
tablished by the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
for such issuers. 
"(b) External Review. — A group health plan and a health in- 
surance issuer offering group or individual health insurance cov- 
erage — 

"(1) shall comply with the applicable State external review 
process for such plans and issuers that, at a minimum, in- 
cludes the consumer protections set forth in the Uniform Ex- 
ternal Review Model Act promulgated by the National Associa- 
tion of Insurance Commissioners and is binding on such plans; 
or 

"(2) shall implement an effective external review process 
that meets minimum standards established by the Secretary 
through guidance and that is similar to the process described 
under paragraph (1) — 

"(A) if the applicable State has not established an ex- 
ternal review process that meets the requirements of para- 
graph (1); or 

"(B) if the plan is a self-insured plan that is not sub- 
ject to State insurance regulation (including a State law 
that establishes an external review process described in 
paragraph (1)). 

"(c) Secretary Authority. — The Secretary may deem the ex- 
ternal review process of a group health plan or health insurance 
issuer, in operation as of the date of enactment of this section, to 
be in compliance with the applicable process established under sub- 
section (b), as determined appropriate by the Secretary. 

"SEC. 2719A [42 U.S.C. 300gg-19a]. PATIENT PROTECTIONS. 

[Section inserted by section 10101(h)~\ 

"(a) Choice of Health Care Professional. — If a group 
health plan, or a health insurance issuer offering group or indi- 
vidual health insurance coverage, requires or provides for designa- 
tion by a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee of a participating pri- 
mary care provider, then the plan or issuer shall permit each par- 
ticipant, beneficiary, and enrollee to designate any participating 
primary care provider who is available to accept such individual. 
"(b) Coverage of Emergency Services. — 

"(1) In general. — If a group health plan, or a health in- 
surance issuer offering group or individual health insurance 
issuer, provides or covers any benefits with respect to services 
in an emergency department of a hospital, the plan or issuer 
shall cover emergency services (as defined in paragraph 
(2KB)) — 

June 9, 2010 



25 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 1001X2719A PHSA 



"(A) without the need for any prior authorization de- 
termination; 

"(B) whether the health care provider furnishing such 
services is a participating provider with respect to such 
services; 

"(C) in a manner so that, if such services are provided 
to a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee — 

"(i) by a nonparticipating health care provider 
with or without prior authorization; or 

"(h)(1) such services will be provided without im- 
posing any requirement under the plan for prior au- 
thorization of services or any limitation on coverage 
where the provider of services does not have a contrac- 
tual relationship with the plan for the providing of 
services that is more restrictive than the requirements 
or limitations that apply to emergency department 
services received from providers who do have such a 
contractual relationship with the plan; and 

"(II) if such services are provided out-of-network, 
the cost-sharing requirement (expressed as a copay- 
ment amount or coinsurance rate) is the same require- 
ment that would apply if such services were provided 
in-network; 

"(D) without regard to any other term or condition of 
such coverage (other than exclusion or coordination of ben- 
efits, or an affiliation or waiting period, permitted under 
section 2701 of this Act, section 701 of the Employee Re- 
tirement Income Security Act of 1974, or section 9801 of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and other than appli- 
cable cost-sharing). 
"(2) Definitions. — In this subsection: 

"(A) Emergency medical condition. — The term 
'emergency medical condition' means a medical condition 
manifesting itself by acute symptoms of sufficient severity 
(including severe pain) such that a prudent layperson, who 
possesses an average knowledge of health and medicine, 
could reasonably expect the absence of immediate medical 
attention to result in a condition described in clause (i), 
(ii), or (iii) of section 1867(e)(1)(A) of the Social Security 
Act. 

"(B) Emergency services. — The term 'emergency 
services' means, with respect to an emergency medical con- 
dition — 

"(i) a medical screening examination (as required 
under section 1867 of the Social Security Act) that is 
within the capability of the emergency department of 
a hospital, including ancillary services routinely avail- 
able to the emergency department to evaluate such 
emergency medical condition, and 

"(ii) within the capabilities of the staff and facili- 
ties available at the hospital, such further medical ex- 
amination and treatment as are required under sec- 
tion 1867 of such Act to stabilize the patient. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1001X2719A PHSA PPACA (Consolidated) 



26 



"(C) Stabilize. — The term 'to stabilize', with respect to 
an emergency medical condition (as defined in subpara- 
graph (A)), has the meaning give in section 1867(e)(3) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395dd(e)(3)). 
"(c) Access to Pediatric Care. — 

"(1) Pediatric care. — In the case of a person who has a 
child who is a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee under a 
group health plan, or health insurance coverage offered by a 
health insurance issuer in the group or individual market, if 
the plan or issuer requires or provides for the designation of 
a participating primary care provider for the child, the plan or 
issuer shall permit such person to designate a physician 
(allopathic or osteopathic) who specializes in pediatrics as the 
child's primary care provider if such provider participates in 
the network of the plan or issuer. 

"(2) Construction. — Nothing in paragraph (1) shall be 
construed to waive any exclusions of coverage under the terms 
and conditions of the plan or health insurance coverage with 
respect to coverage of pediatric care. 

"(d) Patient Access to Obstetrical and Gynecological 
Care. — 

"(1) General rights. — 

"(A) Direct access. — A group health plan, or health 
insurance issuer offering group or individual health insur- 
ance coverage, described in paragraph (2) may not require 
authorization or referral by the plan, issuer, or any person 
(including a primary care provider described in paragraph 
(2)(B)) in the case of a female participant, beneficiary, or 
enrollee who seeks coverage for obstetrical or gynecological 
care provided by a participating health care professional 
who specializes in obstetrics or gynecology. Such profes- 
sional shall agree to otherwise adhere to such plan's or 
issuer's policies and procedures, including procedures re- 
garding referrals and obtaining prior authorization and 
providing services pursuant to a treatment plan (if any) 
approved by the plan or issuer. 

"(B) Obstetrical and gynecological care. — A group 
health plan or health insurance issuer described in para- 
graph (2) shall treat the provision of obstetrical and gyne- 
cological care, and the ordering of related obstetrical and 
gynecological items and services, pursuant to the direct ac- 
cess described under subparagraph (A), by a participating 
health care professional who specializes in obstetrics or 
gynecology as the authorization of the primary care pro- 
vider. 

"(2) Application of paragraph. — A group health plan, or 
health insurance issuer offering group or individual health in- 
surance coverage, described in this paragraph is a group 
health plan or coverage that — 

"(A) provides coverage for obstetric or gynecologic care; 

and 

"(B) requires the designation by a participant, bene- 
ficiary, or enrollee of a participating primary care provider. 

June 9, 2010 



27 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1002X2713 PHSA 



"(3) Construction. — Nothing in paragraph (1) shall be 
construed to — 

"(A) waive any exclusions of coverage under the terms 
and conditions of the plan or health insurance coverage 
with respect to coverage of obstetrical or gynecological 
care; or 

"(B) preclude the group health plan or health insur- 
ance issuer involved from requiring that the obstetrical or 
gynecological provider notify the primary care health care 
professional or the plan or issuer of treatment decisions.". 

SEC. 1002. HEALTH INSURANCE CONSUMER INFORMATION. 

Part C of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 300gg-91 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing: 

"SEC. 2793 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-93]. HEALTH INSURANCE CONSUMER IN- 
FORMATION. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary shall award grants to States 
to enable such States (or the Exchanges operating in such States) 
to establish, expand, or provide support for — 

"(1) offices of health insurance consumer assistance; or 
"(2) health insurance ombudsman programs. 
"(b) Eligibility. — 

"(1) In general. — To be eligible to receive a grant, a State 
shall designate an independent office of health insurance con- 
sumer assistance, or an ombudsman, that, directly or in coordi- 
nation with State health insurance regulators and consumer 
assistance organizations, receives and responds to inquiries 
and complaints concerning health insurance coverage with re- 
spect to Federal health insurance requirements and under 
State law. 

"(2) Criteria. — A State that receives a grant under this 
section shall comply with criteria established by the Secretary 
for carrying out activities under such grant. 
"(c) Duties. — The office of health insurance consumer assist- 
ance or health insurance ombudsman shall — 

"(1) assist with the filing of complaints and appeals, in- 
cluding filing appeals with the internal appeal or grievance 
process of the group health plan or health insurance issuer in- 
volved and providing information about the external appeal 
process; 

"(2) collect, track, and quantify problems and inquiries en- 
countered by consumers; 

"(3) educate consumers on their rights and responsibilities 
with respect to group health plans and health insurance cov- 
erage; 

"(4) assist consumers with enrollment in a group health 
plan or health insurance coverage by providing information, re- 
ferral, and assistance; and 

"(5) resolve problems with obtaining premium tax credits 
under section 36B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. 
"(d) Data Collection. — As a condition of receiving a grant 
under subsection (a), an office of health insurance consumer assist- 
ance or ombudsman program shall be required to collect and report 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1003 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



28 



data to the Secretary on the types of problems and inquiries en- 
countered by consumers. The Secretary shall utilize such data to 
identify areas where more enforcement action is necessary and 
shall share such information with State insurance regulators, the 
Secretary of Labor, and the Secretary of the Treasury for use in the 
enforcement activities of such agencies. 
"(e) Funding. — 

"(1) Initial funding. — There is hereby appropriated to the 
Secretary, out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise ap- 
propriated, $30,000,000 for the first fiscal year for which this 
section applies to carry out this section. Such amount shall re- 
main available without fiscal year limitation. 

"(2) Authorization for subsequent years. — There is au- 
thorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for each fiscal year 
following the fiscal year described in paragraph (1), such sums 
as may be necessary to carry out this section.". 

SEC. 1003. ENSURING THAT CONSUMERS GET VALUE FOR THEIR DOL- 
LARS. 

Part C of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 300gg-91 et seq.), as amended by section 1002, is further 
amended by adding at the end the following: 

"SEC. 2794 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-94]. ENSURING THAT CONSUMERS GET 
VALUE FOR THEIR DOLLARS. 

"(a) Initial Premium Review Process. — 

"(1) In GENERAL. — The Secretary, in conjunction with 
States, shall establish a process for the annual review, begin- 
ning with the 2010 plan year and subject to subsection 

(b) (2)(A), of unreasonable increases in premiums for health in- 
surance coverage. 

"(2) Justification and disclosure. — The process estab- 
lished under paragraph (1) shall require health insurance 
issuers to submit to the Secretary and the relevant State a jus- 
tification for an unreasonable premium increase prior to the 
implementation of the increase. Such issuers shall prominently 
post such information on their Internet websites. The Sec- 
retary shall ensure the public disclosure of information on such 
increases and justifications for all health insurance issuers. 
"(b) Continuing Premium Review Process. — 

"(1) Informing secretary of premium increase pat- 
terns. — As a condition of receiving a grant under subsection 

(c) (1), a State, through its Commissioner of Insurance, shall — 

"(A) provide the Secretary with information about 
trends in premium increases in health insurance coverage 
in premium rating areas in the State; and 

"(B) make recommendations, as appropriate, to the 
State Exchange about whether particular health insurance 
issuers should be excluded from participation in the Ex- 
change based on a pattern or practice of excessive or un- 
justified premium increases. 

"(2) Monitoring by secretary of premium increases. — 
"(A) In general. — Beginning with plan years begin- 
ning in 2014, the Secretary, in conjunction with the States 
and consistent with the provisions of subsection (a)(2), 

June 9, 2010 



29 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1003X2794 PHSA 



shall monitor premium increases of health insurance cov- 
erage offered through an Exchange and outside of an Ex- 
change. 

"(B) Consideration in opening exchange. — In deter- 
mining under section 1312(f)(2)(B) of the Patient Protec- 
tion and Affordable Care Act whether to offer qualified 
health plans in the large group market through an Ex- 
change, the State shall take into account any excess of pre- 
mium growth outside of the Exchange as compared to the 
rate of such growth inside the Exchange. 
"(c) Grants in Support of Process. — 

"(1) Premium review grants during 2010 through 2014. — 
The Secretary shall carry out a program to award grants to 
States during the 5-year period beginning with fiscal year 2010 
to assist such States in carrying out subsection (a), including — 
"(A) in reviewing and, if appropriate under State law, 
approving premium increases for health insurance cov- 
erage; 

"(B) in providing information and recommendations to 
the Secretary under subsection (b)(1); and 

"(C) [As added by section 10101(i)(l)(C)] in estab- 
lishing centers (consistent with subsection (d)) at academic 
or other nonprofit institutions to collect medical reimburse- 
ment information from health insurance issuers, to ana- 
lyze and organize such information, and to make such in- 
formation available to such issuers, health care providers, 
health researchers, health care policy makers, and the 
general public. 
"(2) Funding. — 

"(A) In general. — Out of all funds in the Treasury not 
otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated to the Sec- 
retary $250,000,000, to be available for expenditure for 
grants under paragraph (1) and subparagraph (B). 

"(B) Further availability for insurance reform 
and consumer protection. — If the amounts appropriated 
under subparagraph (A) are not fully obligated under 
grants under paragraph (1) by the end of fiscal year 2014, 
any remaining funds shall remain available to the Sec- 
retary for grants to States for planning and implementing 
the insurance reforms and consumer protections under 
part A. 

"(C) Allocation. — The Secretary shall establish a for- 
mula for determining the amount of any grant to a State 
under this subsection. Under such formula — 

"(i) the Secretary shall consider the number of 
plans of health insurance coverage offered in each 
State and the population of the State; and 

"(ii) no State qualifying for a grant under para- 
graph (1) shall receive less than $1,000,000, or more 
than $5,000,000 for a grant year. 
"(d) Medical Reimbursement Data Centers. — [As added by 
section 10101(i)(2)~\ 

"(1) Functions. — A center established under subsection 
(c)(1)(C) shall— 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1004 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



30 



"(A) develop fee schedules and other database tools 
that fairly and accurately reflect market rates for medical 
services and the geographic differences in those rates; 

"(B) use the best available statistical methods and 
data processing technology to develop such fee schedules 
and other database tools; 

"(C) regularly update such fee schedules and other 
database tools to reflect changes in charges for medical 
services; 

"(D) make health care cost information readily avail- 
able to the public through an Internet website that allows 
consumers to understand the amounts that health care 
providers in their area charge for particular medical serv- 
ices; and 

"(E) regularly publish information concerning the sta- 
tistical methodologies used by the center to analyze health 
charge data and make such data available to researchers 
and policy makers. 

"(2) Conflicts of interest. — A center established under 
subsection (c)(1)(C) shall adopt by-laws that ensures that the 
center (and all members of the governing board of the center) 
is independent and free from all conflicts of interest. Such by- 
laws shall ensure that the center is not controlled or influenced 
by, and does not have any corporate relation to, any individual 
or entity that may make or receive payments for health care 
services based on the center's analysis of health care costs. 

"(3) Rule of construction. — Nothing in this subsection 
shall be construed to permit a center established under sub- 
section (c)(1)(C) to compel health insurance issuers to provide 
data to the center.". 

SEC. 1004 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-ll note]. EFFECTIVE DATES. 

(a) In General. — Except as provided for in subsection (b), this 
subtitle (and the amendments made by this subtitle) shall become 
effective for plan years beginning on or after the date that is 6 
months after the date of enactment of this Act, except that the 
amendments made by sections 1002 and 1003 shall become effec- 
tive for fiscal years beginning with fiscal year 2010. 

(b) Special Rule. — The amendments made by sections 1002 
and 1003 shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act. 

Subtitle B — Immediate Actions to Preserve 
and Expand Coverage 

SEC. 1101 [42 U.S.C. 18001]. IMMEDIATE ACCESS TO INSURANCE FOR 
UNINSURED INDD7IDUALS WITH A PREEXISTING CONDI- 
TION. 

(a) In General. — Not later than 90 days after the date of en- 
actment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish a temporary high 
risk health insurance pool program to provide health insurance 
coverage for eligible individuals during the period beginning on the 
date on which such program is established and ending on January 
1, 2014. 

(b) Administration. — 

June 9, 2010 



31 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1101 



(1) In general. — The Secretary may carry out the pro- 
gram under this section directly or through contracts to eligible 
entities. 

(2) Eligible entities. — To be eligible for a contract under 
paragraph (1), an entity shall — 

(A) be a State or nonprofit private entity; 

(B) submit to the Secretary an application at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
the Secretary may require; and 

(C) agree to utilize contract funding to establish and 
administer a qualified high risk pool for eligible individ- 
uals. 

(3) Maintenance of effort. — To be eligible to enter into 
a contract with the Secretary under this subsection, a State 
shall agree not to reduce the annual amount the State ex- 
pended for the operation of one or more State high risk pools 
during the year preceding the year in which such contract is 
entered into. 

(c) Qualified High Risk Pool. — 

(1) In general. — Amounts made available under this sec- 
tion shall be used to establish a qualified high risk pool that 
meets the requirements of paragraph (2). 

(2) Requirements. — A qualified high risk pool meets the 
requirements of this paragraph if such pool — 

(A) provides to all eligible individuals health insurance 
coverage that does not impose any preexisting condition 
exclusion with respect to such coverage; 

(B) provides health insurance coverage — 

(i) in which the issuer's share of the total allowed 
costs of benefits provided under such coverage is not 
less than 65 percent of such costs; and 

(ii) that has an out of pocket limit not greater 
than the applicable amount described in section 
223(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for the 
year involved, except that the Secretary may modify 
such limit if necessary to ensure the pool meets the ac- 
tuarial value limit under clause (i); 

(C) ensures that with respect to the premium rate 
charged for health insurance coverage offered to eligible 
individuals through the high risk pool, such rate shall — 

(i) except as provided in clause (ii), vary only as 
provided for under section 2701 of the Public Health 
Service Act (as amended by this Act and notwith- 
standing the date on which such amendments take ef- 
fect); 

(ii) vary on the basis of age by a factor of not 
greater than 4 to 1; and 

(iii) be established at a standard rate for a stand- 
ard population; and 

(D) meets any other requirements determined appro- 
priate by the Secretary. 

(d) Eligible Individual. — An individual shall be deemed to be 
an eligible individual for purposes of this section if such indi- 
vidual — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1101 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



32 



(1) is a citizen or national of the United States or is law- 
fully present in the United States (as determined in accordance 
with section 1411); 

(2) has not been covered under creditable coverage (as de- 
fined in section 2701(c)(1) of the Public Health Service Act as 
in effect on the date of enactment of this Act) during the 6- 
month period prior to the date on which such individual is ap- 
plying for coverage through the high risk pool; and 

(3) has a pre-existing condition, as determined in a man- 
ner consistent with guidance issued by the Secretary. 

(e) Protection Against Dumping Risk by Insurers. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary shall establish criteria for 
determining whether health insurance issuers and employ- 
ment-based health plans have discouraged an individual from 
remaining enrolled in prior coverage based on that individual's 
health status. 

(2) Sanctions. — An issuer or employment-based health 
plan shall be responsible for reimbursing the program under 
this section for the medical expenses incurred by the program 
for an individual who, based on criteria established by the Sec- 
retary, the Secretary finds was encouraged by the issuer to 
disenroll from health benefits coverage prior to enrolling in 
coverage through the program. The criteria shall include at 
least the following circumstances: 

(A) In the case of prior coverage obtained through an 
employer, the provision by the employer, group health 
plan, or the issuer of money or other financial consider- 
ation for disenrolling from the coverage. 

(B) In the case of prior coverage obtained directly from 
an issuer or under an employment-based health plan — 

(i) the provision by the issuer or plan of money or 
other financial consideration for disenrolling from the 
coverage; or 

(ii) in the case of an individual whose premium for 
the prior coverage exceeded the premium required by 
the program (adjusted based on the age factors applied 
to the prior coverage) — 

(I) the prior coverage is a policy that is no 
longer being actively marketed (as defined by the 
Secretary) by the issuer; or 

(II) the prior coverage is a policy for which 
duration of coverage form issue or health status 
are factors that can be considered in determining 
premiums at renewal. 

(3) Construction. — Nothing in this subsection shall be 
construed as constituting exclusive remedies for violations of 
criteria established under paragraph (1) or as preventing 
States from applying or enforcing such paragraph or other pro- 
visions under law with respect to health insurance issuers. 

(f) Oversight. — The Secretary shall establish — 

(1) an appeals process to enable individuals to appeal a de- 
termination under this section; and 

(2) procedures to protect against waste, fraud, and abuse. 

(g) Funding; Termination of Authority. — 

June 9, 2010 



33 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1102 



(1) In general. — There is appropriated to the Secretary, 
out of any moneys in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, 
$5,000,000,000 to pay claims against (and the administrative 
costs of) the high risk pool under this section that are in excess 
of the amount of premiums collected from eligible individuals 
enrolled in the high risk pool. Such funds shall be available 
without fiscal year limitation. 

(2) Insufficient funds. — If the Secretary estimates for 
any fiscal year that the aggregate amounts available for the 
payment of the expenses of the high risk pool will be less than 
the actual amount of such expenses, the Secretary shall make 
such adjustments as are necessary to eliminate such deficit. 

(3) Termination of authority. — 

(A) In general. — Except as provided in subparagraph 
(B), coverage of eligible individuals under a high risk pool 
in a State shall terminate on January 1, 2014. 

(B) Transition to exchange. — The Secretary shall 
develop procedures to provide for the transition of eligible 
individuals enrolled in health insurance coverage offered 
through a high risk pool established under this section into 
qualified health plans offered through an Exchange. Such 
procedures shall ensure that there is no lapse in coverage 
with respect to the individual and may extend coverage 
after the termination of the risk pool involved, if the Sec- 
retary determines necessary to avoid such a lapse. 

(4) Limitations. — The Secretary has the authority to stop 
taking applications for participation in the program under this 
section to comply with the funding limitation provided for in 
paragraph (1). 

(5) Relation to state laws. — The standards established 
under this section shall supersede any State law or regulation 
(other than State licensing laws or State laws relating to plan 
solvency) with respect to qualified high risk pools which are es- 
tablished in accordance with this section. 

SEC. 1102 [42 U.S.C. 18002]. REINSURANCE FOR EARLY RETIREES. 

(a) Administration. — 

(1) In general. — Not later than 90 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish a tem- 
porary reinsurance program to provide reimbursement to par- 
ticipating employment-based plans for a portion of the cost of 
providing health insurance coverage to early retirees (and to 
the eligible spouses, surviving spouses, and dependents of such 
retirees) during the period beginning on the date on which 
such program is established and ending on January 1, 2014. 

(2) Reference. — In this section: 

(A) Health benefits. — The term "health benefits" 
means medical, surgical, hospital, prescription drug, and 
such other benefits as shall be determined by the Sec- 
retary, whether self-funded, or delivered through the pur- 
chase of insurance or otherwise. 

(B) Employment-based plan. — [As revised by section 
101012(a)~\ The term "employment-based plan" means a 
group benefits plan providing health benefits that — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1102 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



34 



(i) is— 

(I) maintained by one or more current or 
former employers (including without limitation 
any State or local government or political subdivi- 
sion thereof or any agency or instrumentality of 
any of the foregoing), employee organization, a 
voluntary employees' beneficiary association, or a 
committee or board of individuals appointed to ad- 
minister such plan; or 

(II) a multiemployer plan (as defined in sec- 
tion 3(37) of the Employee Retirement Income Se- 
curity Act of 1974); and 

(ii) provides health benefits to early retirees. 

(C) Early retirees. — The term "early retirees" means 
individuals who are age 55 and older but are not eligible 
for coverage under title XVIII of the Social Security Act, 
and who are not active employees of an employer main- 
taining, or currently contributing to, the employment- 
based plan or of any employer that has made substantial 
contributions to fund such plan. 

(b) Participation. — 

(1) Employment-based plan eligibility. — A participating 
employment-based plan is an employment -based plan that — 

(A) meets the requirements of paragraph (2) with re- 
spect to health benefits provided under the plan; and 

(B) submits to the Secretary an application for partici- 
pation in the program, at such time, in such manner, and 
containing such information as the Secretary shall require. 

(2) Employment-based health benefits. — An employ- 
ment-based plan meets the requirements of this paragraph if 
the plan — 

(A) implements programs and procedures to generate 
cost-savings with respect to participants with chronic and 
high-cost conditions; 

(B) provides documentation of the actual cost of med- 
ical claims involved; and 

(C) is certified by the Secretary. 

(c) Payments. — 

(1) Submission of claims. — 

(A) In general. — A participating employment-based 
plan shall submit claims for reimbursement to the Sec- 
retary which shall contain documentation of the actual 
costs of the items and services for which each claim is 
being submitted. 

(B) Basis for claims. — Claims submitted under sub- 
paragraph (A) shall be based on the actual amount ex- 
pended by the participating employment-based plan in- 
volved within the plan year for the health benefits pro- 
vided to an early retiree or the spouse, surviving spouse, 
or dependent of such retiree. In determining the amount 
of a claim for purposes of this subsection, the participating 
employment-based plan shall take into account any nego- 
tiated price concessions (such as discounts, direct or indi- 
rect subsidies, rebates, and direct or indirect remunera- 

June 9, 2010 



35 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1102 



tions) obtained by such plan with respect to such health 
benefit. For purposes of determining the amount of any 
such claim, the costs paid by the early retiree or the retir- 
ee's spouse, surviving spouse, or dependent in the form of 
deductibles, co-payments, or co-insurance shall be included 
in the amounts paid by the participating employment- 
based plan. 

(2) Program payments. — If the Secretary determines that 
a participating employment-based plan has submitted a valid 
claim under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall reimburse such 
plan for 80 percent of that portion of the costs attributable to 
such claim that exceed $15,000, subject to the limits contained 
in paragraph (3). 

(3) Limit. — To be eligible for reimbursement under the pro- 
gram, a claim submitted by a participating employment-based 
plan shall not be less than $15,000 nor greater than $90,000. 
Such amounts shall be adjusted each fiscal year based on the 
percentage increase in the Medical Care Component of the 
Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers (rounded to the 
nearest multiple of $1,000) for the year involved. 

(4) Use of payments. — Amounts paid to a participating 
employment-based plan under this subsection shall be used to 
lower costs for the plan. Such payments may be used to reduce 
premium costs for an entity described in subsection (a)(2)(B)(i) 
or to reduce premium contributions, co-payments, deductibles, 
co-insurance, or other out-of-pocket costs for plan participants. 
Such payments shall not be used as general revenues for an 
entity described in subsection (a)(2)(B)(i). The Secretary shall 
develop a mechanism to monitor the appropriate use of such 
payments by such entities. 

(5) Payments not treated as income. — Payments re- 
ceived under this subsection shall not be included in deter- 
mining the gross income of an entity described in subsection 
(a)(2)(B)(i) that is maintaining or currently contributing to a 
participating employment -based plan. 

(6) Appeals. — The Secretary shall establish — 

(A) an appeals process to permit participating employ- 
ment-based plans to appeal a determination of the Sec- 
retary with respect to claims submitted under this section; 
and 

(B) procedures to protect against fraud, waste, and 
abuse under the program. 

(d) Audits. — The Secretary shall conduct annual audits of 
claims data submitted by participating employment-based plans 
under this section to ensure that such plans are in compliance with 
the requirements of this section. 

(e) Funding. — There is appropriated to the Secretary, out of 
any moneys in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, 
$5,000,000,000 to carry out the program under this section. Such 
funds shall be available without fiscal year limitation. 

(f) Limitation. — The Secretary has the authority to stop taking 
applications for participation in the program based on the avail- 
ability of funding under subsection (e). 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1103 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



36 



SEC. 1103 [42 U.S.C. 18003]. IMMEDIATE INFORMATION THAT ALLOWS 
CONSUMERS TO IDENTIFY AFFORDABLE COVERAGE OP- 
TIONS. 

(a) Internet Portal to Affordable Coverage Options. — 

(1) Immediate establishment. — [As revised by section 
10102(b)(1)] Not later than July 1, 2010, the Secretary, in con- 
sultation with the States, shall establish a mechanism, includ- 
ing an Internet website, through which a resident of any, or 
small business in, State may identify affordable health insur- 
ance coverage options in that State. 

(2) Connecting to affordable coverage. — [Replaced by 
section 10102(b)(2)~\ An Internet website established under 
paragraph (1) shall, to the extent practicable, provide ways for 
residents of, and small businesses in, any State to receive in- 
formation on at least the following coverage options: 

(A) Health insurance coverage offered by health insur- 
ance issuers, other than coverage that provides reimburse- 
ment only for the treatment or mitigation of — 

(i) a single disease or condition; or 

(ii) an unreasonably limited set of diseases or con- 
ditions (as determined by the Secretary). 

(B) Medicaid coverage under title XIX of the Social Se- 
curity Act. 

(C) Coverage under title XXI of the Social Security 

Act. 

(D) A State health benefits high risk pool, to the ex- 
tent that such high risk pool is offered in such State; and 

(E) Coverage under a high risk pool under section 
1101. 

(F) Coverage within the small group market for small 
businesses and their employees, including reinsurance for 
early retirees under section 1102, tax credits available 
under section 45R of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
(as added by section 1421), and other information specifi- 
cally for small businesses regarding affordable health care 
options. 

(b) Enhancing Comparative Purchasing Options. — 

(1) In general. — Not later than 60 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop a standard- 
ized format to be used for the presentation of information re- 
lating to the coverage options described in subsection (a)(2). 
Such format shall, at a minimum, require the inclusion of in- 
formation on the percentage of total premium revenue ex- 
pended on nonclinical costs (as reported under section 2718(a) 
of the Public Health Service Act), eligibility, availability, pre- 
mium rates, and cost sharing with respect to such coverage op- 
tions and be consistent with the standards adopted for the uni- 
form explanation of coverage as provided for in section 2715 of 
the Public Health Service Act. 

(2) Use of format. — The Secretary shall utilize the for- 
mat developed under paragraph (1) in compiling information 
concerning coverage options on the Internet website estab- 
lished under subsection (a). 

June 9, 2010 



37 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1104 



(c) Authority To Contract. — The Secretary may carry out 
this section through contracts entered into with qualified entities. 
SEC. 1104. ADMINISTRATIVE SIMPLIFICATION. 

(a) Purpose of Administrative Simplification. — Section 261 
of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
(42 U.S.C. 1320d note) is amended— 

(1) by inserting "uniform" before "standards"; and 

(2) by inserting "and to reduce the clerical burden on pa- 
tients, health care providers, and health plans" before the pe- 
riod at the end. 

(b) Operating Rules for Health Information Trans- 
actions. — 

(1) Definition of operating rules. — Section 1171 of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320d) is amended by adding at 
the end the following: 

"(9) Operating rules. — The term 'operating rules' means 
the necessary business rules and guidelines for the electronic 
exchange of information that are not defined by a standard or 
its implementation specifications as adopted for purposes of 
this part.". 

(2) Transaction standards; operating rules and com- 
pliance. — Section 1173 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1320d-2) is amended— 

(A) in subsection (a)(2), by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new subparagraph: 

"(J) Electronic funds transfers."; 

(B) in subsection (a), by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new paragraph: 

"(4) Requirements for financial and administrative 
transactions. — 

"(A) In general. — The standards and associated oper- 
ating rules adopted by the Secretary shall — 

"(i) to the extent feasible and appropriate, enable 
determination of an individual's eligibility and finan- 
cial responsibility for specific services prior to or at the 
point of care; 

"(ii) be comprehensive, requiring minimal aug- 
mentation by paper or other communications; 

"(hi) provide for timely acknowledgment, response, 
and status reporting that supports a transparent 
claims and denial management process (including ad- 
judication and appeals); and 

"(iv) describe all data elements (including reason 
and remark codes) in unambiguous terms, require that 
such data elements be required or conditioned upon 
set values in other fields, and prohibit additional con- 
ditions (except where necessary to implement State or 
Federal law, or to protect against fraud and abuse). 
"(B) Reduction of clerical burden. — In adopting 
standards and operating rules for the transactions referred 
to under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall seek to reduce 
the number and complexity of forms (including paper and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1104 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



38 



electronic forms) and data entry required by patients and 
providers. 

[Section 10109(a), p. 838, added a paragraph (5) relating to 
consideration of standardization of activities and items\ 

(C) by adding at the end the following new sub- 
sections: 
"(g) Operating Rules. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall adopt a single set of 
operating rules for each transaction referred to under sub- 
section (a)(1) with the goal of creating as much uniformity in 
the implementation of the electronic standards as possible. 
Such operating rules shall be consensus-based and reflect the 
necessary business rules affecting health plans and health care 
providers and the manner in which they operate pursuant to 
standards issued under Health Insurance Portability and Ac- 
countability Act of 1996. 

"(2) Operating rules development. — In adopting oper- 
ating rules under this subsection, the Secretary shall consider 
recommendations for operating rules developed by a qualified 
nonprofit entity that meets the following requirements: 

"(A) The entity focuses its mission on administrative 
simplification. 

"(B) The entity demonstrates a multi-stakeholder and 
consensus-based process for development of operating 
rules, including representation by or participation from 
health plans, health care providers, vendors, relevant Fed- 
eral agencies, and other standard development organiza- 
tions. 

"(C) The entity has a public set of guiding principles 
that ensure the operating rules and process are open and 
transparent, and supports nondiscrimination and conflict 
of interest policies that demonstrate a commitment to 
open, fair, and nondiscriminatory practices. 

"(D) The entity builds on the transaction standards 
issued under Health Insurance Portability and Account- 
ability Act of 1996. 

"(E) The entity allows for public review and updates of 
the operating rules. 

"(3) Review and recommendations. — The National Com- 
mittee on Vital and Health Statistics shall — 

"(A) advise the Secretary as to whether a nonprofit en- 
tity meets the requirements under paragraph (2); 

"(B) review the operating rules developed and rec- 
ommended by such nonprofit entity; 

"(C) determine whether such operating rules represent 
a consensus view of the health care stakeholders and are 
consistent with and do not conflict with other existing 
standards; 

"(D) evaluate whether such operating rules are con- 
sistent with electronic standards adopted for health infor- 
mation technology; and 

"(E) submit to the Secretary a recommendation as to 
whether the Secretary should adopt such operating rules. 
"(4) Implementation. — 

June 9, 2010 



39 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1104 



"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall adopt operating 
rules under this subsection, by regulation in accordance 
with subparagraph (C), following consideration of the oper- 
ating rules developed by the non-profit entity described in 
paragraph (2) and the recommendation submitted by the 
National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics under 
paragraph (3)(E) and having ensured consultation with 
providers. 

"(B) Adoption requirements; effective dates. — 

"(i) Eligibility for a health plan and health 
claim status. — The set of operating rules for eligi- 
bility for a health plan and health claim status trans- 
actions shall be adopted not later than July 1, 2011, 
in a manner ensuring that such operating rules are ef- 
fective not later than January 1, 2013, and may allow 
for the use of a machine readable identification card, 
"(ii) Electronic funds transfers and health 

CARE PAYMENT AND REMITTANCE ADVICE. — The Set of 
operating rules for electronic funds transfers and 
health care payment and remittance advice trans- 
actions shall — 

"(I) allow for automated reconciliation of the 

electronic payment with the remittance advice; 

and 

"(II) be adopted not later than July 1, 2012, in 
a manner ensuring that such operating rules are 
effective not later than January 1, 2014. 
"(hi) Health claims or equivalent encounter 

INFORMATION, ENROLLMENT AND DISENROLLMENT IN A 
HEALTH PLAN, HEALTH PLAN PREMIUM PAYMENTS, RE- 
FERRAL CERTIFICATION AND AUTHORIZATION. — The Set 
of operating rules for health claims or equivalent en- 
counter information, enrollment and disenrollment in 
a health plan, health plan premium payments, and re- 
ferral certification and authorization transactions 
shall be adopted not later than July 1, 2014, in a man- 
ner ensuring that such operating rules are effective 
not later than January 1, 2016. 

"(C) Expedited rulemaking. — The Secretary shall 
promulgate an interim final rule applying any standard or 
operating rule recommended by the National Committee 
on Vital and Health Statistics pursuant to paragraph (3). 
The Secretary shall accept and consider public comments 
on any interim final rule published under this subpara- 
graph for 60 days after the date of such publication. 
"(h) Compliance. — 

"(1) Health plan certification. — 

"(A) Eligibility for a health plan, health claim 

STATUS, ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFERS, HEALTH CARE PAY- 
MENT and remittance advice. — Not later than December 
31, 2013, a health plan shall file a statement with the Sec- 
retary, in such form as the Secretary may require, certi- 
fying that the data and information systems for such plan 
are in compliance with any applicable standards (as de- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1104 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



40 



scribed under paragraph (7) of section 1171) and associ- 
ated operating rules (as described under paragraph (9) of 
such section) for electronic funds transfers, eligibility for a 
health plan, health claim status, and health care payment 
and remittance advice, respectively. 

"(B) Health claims or equivalent encounter in- 
formation, ENROLLMENT AND DISENROLLMENT IN A 
HEALTH PLAN, HEALTH PLAN PREMIUM PAYMENTS, HEALTH 
CLAIMS ATTACHMENTS, REFERRAL CERTIFICATION AND AU- 
THORIZATION. — Not later than December 31, 2015, a health 
plan shall file a statement with the Secretary, in such 
form as the Secretary may require, certifying that the data 
and information systems for such plan are in compliance 
with any applicable standards and associated operating 
rules for health claims or equivalent encounter informa- 
tion, enrollment and disenrollment in a health plan, health 
plan premium payments, health claims attachments, and 
referral certification and authorization, respectively. A 
health plan shall provide the same level of documentation 
to certify compliance with such transactions as is required 
to certify compliance with the transactions specified in 
subparagraph (A). 

"(2) Documentation of compliance. — A health plan shall 
provide the Secretary, in such form as the Secretary may re- 
quire, with adequate documentation of compliance with the 
standards and operating rules described under paragraph (1). 
A health plan shall not be considered to have provided ade- 
quate documentation and shall not be certified as being in com- 
pliance with such standards, unless the health plan — 

"(A) demonstrates to the Secretary that the plan con- 
ducts the electronic transactions specified in paragraph (1) 
in a manner that fully complies with the regulations of the 
Secretary; and 

"(B) provides documentation showing that the plan 
has completed end-to-end testing for such transactions 
with their partners, such as hospitals and physicians. 
"(3) Service contracts. — A health plan shall be required 
to ensure that any entities that provide services pursuant to a 
contract with such health plan shall comply with any applica- 
ble certification and compliance requirements (and provide the 
Secretary with adequate documentation of such compliance) 
under this subsection. 

"(4) Certification by outside entity. — The Secretary 
may designate independent, outside entities to certify that a 
health plan has complied with the requirements under this 
subsection, provided that the certification standards employed 
by such entities are in accordance with any standards or oper- 
ating rules issued by the Secretary. 

"(5) Compliance with revised standards and operating 
rules. — 

"(A) In general. — A health plan (including entities 
described under paragraph (3)) shall file a statement with 
the Secretary, in such form as the Secretary may require, 
certifying that the data and information systems for such 

June 9, 2010 



41 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1104 



plan are in compliance with any applicable revised stand- 
ards and associated operating rules under this subsection 
for any interim final rule promulgated by the Secretary 
under subsection (i) that — 

"(i) amends any standard or operating rule de- 
scribed under paragraph (1) of this subsection; or 

"(ii) establishes a standard (as described under 
subsection (a)(1)(B)) or associated operating rules (as 
described under subsection (i)(5)) for any other finan- 
cial and administrative transactions. 
"(B) Date of compliance. — A health plan shall com- 
ply with such requirements not later than the effective 
date of the applicable standard or operating rule. 
"(6) Audits of health plans. — The Secretary shall con- 
duct periodic audits to ensure that health plans (including en- 
tities described under paragraph (3)) are in compliance with 
any standards and operating rules that are described under 
paragraph (1) or subsection (i)(5). 

"(i) Review and Amendment of Standards and Operating 
Rules. — 

"(1) Establishment. — Not later than January 1, 2014, the 
Secretary shall establish a review committee (as described 
under paragraph (4)). 

"(2) Evaluations and reports. — 

"(A) Hearings. — Not later than April 1, 2014, and not 
less than biennially thereafter, the Secretary, acting 
through the review committee, shall conduct hearings to 
evaluate and review the adopted standards and operating 
rules established under this section. 

"(B) Report.— Not later than July 1, 2014, and not 
less than biennially thereafter, the review committee shall 
provide recommendations for updating and improving such 
standards and operating rules. The review committee shall 
recommend a single set of operating rules per transaction 
standard and maintain the goal of creating as much uni- 
formity as possible in the implementation of the electronic 
standards. 

"(3) Interim final rulemaking. — 

"(A) In general. — Any recommendations to amend 
adopted standards and operating rules that have been ap- 
proved by the review committee and reported to the Sec- 
retary under paragraph (2)(B) shall be adopted by the Sec- 
retary through promulgation of an interim final rule not 
later than 90 days after receipt of the committee's report. 
"(B) Public comment. — 

"(i) Public comment period. — The Secretary 
shall accept and consider public comments on any in- 
terim final rule published under this paragraph for 60 
days after the date of such publication. 

"(ii) Effective date. — The effective date of any 
amendment to existing standards or operating rules 
that is adopted through an interim final rule pub- 
lished under this paragraph shall be 25 months fol- 
lowing the close of such public comment period. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1104 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



42 



"(4) Review committee. — 

"(A) Definition. — For the purposes of this subsection, 
the term 'review committee' means a committee chartered 
by or within the Department of Health and Human serv- 
ices that has been designated by the Secretary to carry out 
this subsection, including — 

"(i) the National Committee on Vital and Health 

Statistics; or 

"(ii) any appropriate committee as determined by 
the Secretary. 

"(B) Coordination of hit standards. — In developing 
recommendations under this subsection, the review com- 
mittee shall ensure coordination, as appropriate, with the 
standards that support the certified electronic health 
record technology approved by the Office of the National 
Coordinator for Health Information Technology. 
"(5) Operating rules for other standards adopted by 
the secretary. — The Secretary shall adopt a single set of op- 
erating rules (pursuant to the process described under sub- 
section (g)) for any transaction for which a standard had been 
adopted pursuant to subsection (a)(1)(B). 
"(j) Penalties. — 

"(1) Penalty fee. — 

"(A) In general. — Not later than April 1, 2014, and 
annually thereafter, the Secretary shall assess a penalty 
fee (as determined under subparagraph (B)) against a 
health plan that has failed to meet the requirements 
under subsection (h) with respect to certification and docu- 
mentation of compliance with — 

"(i) the standards and associated operating rules 
described under paragraph (1) of such subsection; and 
"(ii) a standard (as described under subsection 
(a)(1)(B)) and associated operating rules (as described 
under subsection (i)(5)) for any other financial and ad- 
ministrative transactions. 

"(B) Fee amount. — Subject to subparagraphs (C), (D), 
and (E), the Secretary shall assess a penalty fee against a 
health plan in the amount of $1 per covered life until cer- 
tification is complete. The penalty shall be assessed per 
person covered by the plan for which its data systems for 
major medical policies are not in compliance and shall be 
imposed against the health plan for each day that the plan 
is not in compliance with the requirements under sub- 
section (h). 

"(C) Additional penalty for misrepresentation. — A 
health plan that knowingly provides inaccurate or incom- 
plete information in a statement of certification or docu- 
mentation of compliance under subsection (h) shall be sub- 
ject to a penalty fee that is double the amount that would 
otherwise be imposed under this subsection. 

"(D) Annual fee increase. — The amount of the pen- 
alty fee imposed under this subsection shall be increased 
on an annual basis by the annual percentage increase in 

June 9, 2010 



43 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1104 



total national health care expenditures, as determined by 

the Secretary. 

"(E) Penalty limit. — A penalty fee assessed against a 

health plan under this subsection shall not exceed, on an 

annual basis — 

"(i) an amount equal to $20 per covered life under 
such plan; or 

"(ii) an amount equal to $40 per covered life under 
the plan if such plan has knowingly provided inac- 
curate or incomplete information (as described under 
subparagraph (C)). 

"(F) Determination of covered individuals. — The 
Secretary shall determine the number of covered lives 
under a health plan based upon the most recent state- 
ments and filings that have been submitted by such plan 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission. 
"(2) Notice and dispute procedure. — The Secretary shall 
establish a procedure for assessment of penalty fees under this 
subsection that provides a health plan with reasonable notice 
and a dispute resolution procedure prior to provision of a no- 
tice of assessment by the Secretary of the Treasury (as de- 
scribed under paragraph (4)(B)). 

"(3) Penalty fee report. — Not later than May 1, 2014, 
and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall provide the Sec- 
retary of the Treasury with a report identifying those health 
plans that have been assessed a penalty fee under this sub- 
section. 

"(4) Collection of penalty fee. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary of the Treasury, act- 
ing through the Financial Management Service, shall ad- 
minister the collection of penalty fees from health plans 
that have been identified by the Secretary in the penalty 
fee report provided under paragraph (3). 

"(B) Notice. — Not later than August 1, 2014, and an- 
nually thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury shall pro- 
vide notice to each health plan that has been assessed a 
penalty fee by the Secretary under this subsection. Such 
notice shall include the amount of the penalty fee assessed 
by the Secretary and the due date for payment of such fee 
to the Secretary of the Treasury (as described in subpara- 
graph (C)). 

"(C) Payment due date. — Payment by a health plan 
for a penalty fee assessed under this subsection shall be 
made to the Secretary of the Treasury not later than No- 
vember 1, 2014, and annually thereafter. 

"(D) Unpaid penalty fees. — Any amount of a penalty 
fee assessed against a health plan under this subsection 
for which payment has not been made by the due date pro- 
vided under subparagraph (C) shall be — 

"(i) increased by the interest accrued on such 

amount, as determined pursuant to the underpayment 

rate established under section 6621 of the Internal 

Revenue Code of 1986; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1105 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



44 



"(ii) treated as a past-due, legally enforceable debt 
owed to a Federal agency for purposes of section 
6402(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. 
"(E) Administrative fees. — Any fee charged or allo- 
cated for collection activities conducted by the Financial 
Management Service will be passed on to a health plan on 
a pro-rata basis and added to any penalty fee collected 
from the plan.". 

(c) Promulgation of Rules. — 

(1) Unique health plan identifier. — The Secretary shall 
promulgate a final rule to establish a unique health plan iden- 
tifier (as described in section 1173(b) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1320d-2(b))) based on the input of the National 
Committee on Vital and Health Statistics. The Secretary may 
do so on an interim final basis and such rule shall be effective 
not later than October 1, 2012. 

(2) Electronic funds transfer. — The Secretary shall 
promulgate a final rule to establish a standard for electronic 
funds transfers (as described in section 1173(a)(2)(J) of the So- 
cial Security Act, as added by subsection (b)(2)(A)). The Sec- 
retary may do so on an interim final basis and shall adopt such 
standard not later than January 1, 2012, in a manner ensuring 
that such standard is effective not later than January 1, 2014. 

(3) Health claims attachments. — The Secretary shall 
promulgate a final rule to establish a transaction standard and 
a single set of associated operating rules for health claims at- 
tachments (as described in section 1173(a)(2)(B) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320d-2(a)(2)(B))) that is consistent 
with the X12 Version 5010 transaction standards. The Sec- 
retary may do so on an interim final basis and shall adopt a 
transaction standard and a single set of associated operating 
rules not later than January 1, 2014, in a manner ensuring 
that such standard is effective not later than January 1, 2016. 

(d) Expansion of Electronic Transactions in Medicare. — 
Section 1862(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)) is 
amended — 

(1) in paragraph (23), by striking the "or" at the end; 

(2) in paragraph (24), by striking the period and inserting 
"; or"; and 

(3) by inserting after paragraph (24) the following new 
paragraph: 

"(25) not later than January 1, 2014, for which the pay- 
ment is other than by electronic funds transfer (EFT) or an 
electronic remittance in a form as specified in ASC X12 835 
Health Care Payment and Remittance Advice or subsequent 
standard.". 

[Section 10109, p. 838, provided for development of standards 
for financial and administrative transactions] 

SEC. 1105. EFFECTIVE DATE. 

This subtitle shall take effect on the date of enactment of this 

Act. 

June 9, 2010 



45 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1201 



Subtitle C — Quality Health Insurance 
Coverage for All Americans 

PART 1— HEALTH INSURANCE MARKET 
REFORMS 

SEC. 1201. AMENDMENT TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT. 

Part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 300gg et seq.), as amended by section 1001, is further 
amended — 

(1) by striking the heading for subpart 1 and inserting the 
following: 

"Subpart I — General Reform"; 

(2) (A) in section 2701 (42 U.S.C. 300gg), by striking the 
section heading and subsection (a) and inserting the following: 

"SEC. 2704 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-3]. PROHIBITION OF PREEXISTING CONDI- 
TION EXCLUSIONS OR OTHER DISCRIMINATION BASED 
ON HEALTH STATUS. 

"(a) In General. — A group health plan and a health insurance 
issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage may 
not impose any preexisting condition exclusion with respect to such 
plan or coverage."; and 

(B) by transferring such section (as amended by subpara- 
graph (A)) so as to appear after the section 2703 added by 
paragraph (4); 

(3XA) in section 2702 (42 U.S.C. 300gg-l)— 

(i) by striking the section heading and all that follows 
through subsection (a); 

(ii) in subsection (b) — 

(I) by striking "health insurance issuer offering 
health insurance coverage in connection with a group 
health plan" each place that such appears and insert- 
ing "health insurance issuer offering group or indi- 
vidual health insurance coverage"; and 

(II) in paragraph (2)(A) — 

(aa) by inserting "or individual" after "em- 
ployer"; and 

(bb) by inserting "or individual health cov- 
erage, as the case may be" before the semicolon; 
and 

(iii) in subsection (e) — 

(I) by striking "(a)(1)(F)" and inserting "(a)(6)"; 

(II) by striking "2701" and inserting "2704"; and 

(III) by striking "2721(a)" and inserting "2735(a)"; 

and 

(B) by transferring such section (as amended by sub- 
paragraph (A)) to appear after section 2705(a) as added by 
paragraph (4); and 

(4) by inserting after the subpart heading (as added by 
paragraph (1)) the following: 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1201X2702 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



46 



"SEC. 2701 [42 U.S.C. 300gg]. FAIR HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUMS. 

"(a) Prohibiting Discriminatory Premium Rates. — 

"(1) In general. — With respect to the premium rate 
charged by a health insurance issuer for health insurance cov- 
erage offered in the individual or small group market — 

"(A) such rate shall vary with respect to the particular 
plan or coverage involved only by — 

"(i) whether such plan or coverage covers an indi- 
vidual or family; 

"(ii) rating area, as established in accordance with 
paragraph (2); 

"(hi) age, except that such rate shall not vary by 
more than 3 to 1 for adults (consistent with section 
2707(c)); and 

"(iv) tobacco use, except that such rate shall not 
vary by more than 1.5 to 1; and 

"(B) such rate shall not vary with respect to the par- 
ticular plan or coverage involved by any other factor not 
described in subparagraph (A). 
"(2) Rating area. — 

"(A) In general. — Each State shall establish 1 or 
more rating areas within that State for purposes of apply- 
ing the requirements of this title. 

"(B) Secretarial review. — The Secretary shall review 
the rating areas established by each State under subpara- 
graph (A) to ensure the adequacy of such areas for pur- 
poses of carrying out the requirements of this title. If the 
Secretary determines a State's rating areas are not ade- 
quate, or that a State does not establish such areas, the 
Secretary may establish rating areas for that State. 
"(3) Permissible age bands. — The Secretary, in consulta- 
tion with the National Association of Insurance Commis- 
sioners, shall define the permissible age bands for rating pur- 
poses under paragraph (l)(A)(iii). 

"(4) Application of variations based on age or to- 
bacco USE. — With respect to family coverage under a group 
health plan or health insurance coverage, the rating variations 
permitted under clauses (hi) and (iv) of paragraph (1)(A) shall 
be applied based on the portion of the premium that is attrib- 
utable to each family member covered under the plan or cov- 
erage. 

"(5) Special rule for large group market. — [As revised 
by section 10103(a)~\ If a State permits health insurance 
issuers that offer coverage in the large group market in the 
State to offer such coverage through the State Exchange (as 
provided for under section 1312(f)(2)(B) of the Patient Protec- 
tion and Affordable Care Act), the provisions of this subsection 
shall apply to all coverage offered in such market (other than 
self-insured group health plans offered in such market) in the 
State. 

"SEC. 2702 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-l]. GUARANTEED AVAILABILITY OF COV- 
ERAGE. 

"(a) Guaranteed Issuance of Coverage in the Individual 
and Group Market. — Subject to subsections (b) through (e), each 

June 9, 2010 



47 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1201X2705 PHSA 



health insurance issuer that offers health insurance coverage in the 
individual or group market in a State must accept every employer 
and individual in the State that applies for such coverage. 
"(b) Enrollment. — 

"(1) Restriction. — A health insurance issuer described in 
subsection (a) may restrict enrollment in coverage described in 
such subsection to open or special enrollment periods. 

"(2) Establishment. — A health insurance issuer described 
in subsection (a) shall, in accordance with the regulations pro- 
mulgated under paragraph (3), establish special enrollment pe- 
riods for qualifying events (under section 603 of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974). 

"(3) Regulations. — The Secretary shall promulgate regu- 
lations with respect to enrollment periods under paragraphs 
(1) and (2). 

"SEC. 2703 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-2]. GUARANTEED RENEWABILITY OF COV- 
ERAGE. 

"(a) In General. — Except as provided in this section, if a 
health insurance issuer offers health insurance coverage in the in- 
dividual or group market, the issuer must renew or continue in 
force such coverage at the option of the plan sponsor or the indi- 
vidual, as applicable. 

"sec. 2705 [42 u.s.c. 300gg-4]. prohibiting discrimination 
against inddtidual participants and bene- 
ficiaries BASED ON HEALTH STATUS. 

"(a) In General. — A group health plan and a health insurance 
issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage may 
not establish rules for eligibility (including continued eligibility) of 
any individual to enroll under the terms of the plan or coverage 
based on any of the following health status-related factors in rela- 
tion to the individual or a dependent of the individual: 
"(1) Health status. 

"(2) Medical condition (including both physical and mental 
illnesses). 

"(3) Claims experience. 
"(4) Receipt of health care. 
"(5) Medical history. 
"(6) Genetic information. 

"(7) Evidence of insurability (including conditions arising 
out of acts of domestic violence). 
"(8) Disability. 

"(9) Any other health status-related factor determined ap- 
propriate by the Secretary. 

"(j) Programs of Health Promotion or Disease Preven- 
tion. — 

"(1) General provisions. — 

"(A) General rule. — For purposes of subsection 
(b)(2)(B), a program of health promotion or disease preven- 
tion (referred to in this subsection as a 'wellness program') 
shall be a program offered by an employer that is designed 
to promote health or prevent disease that meets the appli- 
cable requirements of this subsection. 

"(B) No conditions based on health status fac- 
tor. — If none of the conditions for obtaining a premium 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1201X2705 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



48 



discount or rebate or other reward for participation in a 
wellness program is based on an individual satisfying a 
standard that is related to a health status factor, such 
wellness program shall not violate this section if participa- 
tion in the program is made available to all similarly situ- 
ated individuals and the requirements of paragraph (2) are 
complied with. 

"(C) Conditions based on health status factor. — 
If any of the conditions for obtaining a premium discount 
or rebate or other reward for participation in a wellness 
program is based on an individual satisfying a standard 
that is related to a health status factor, such wellness pro- 
gram shall not violate this section if the requirements of 
paragraph (3) are complied with. 

"(2) Wellness programs not subject to require- 
ments. — If none of the conditions for obtaining a premium dis- 
count or rebate or other reward under a wellness program as 
described in paragraph (1)(B) are based on an individual satis- 
fying a standard that is related to a health status factor (or if 
such a wellness program does not provide such a reward), the 
wellness program shall not violate this section if participation 
in the program is made available to all similarly situated indi- 
viduals. The following programs shall not have to comply with 
the requirements of paragraph (3) if participation in the pro- 
gram is made available to all similarly situated individuals: 

"(A) A program that reimburses all or part of the cost 
for memberships in a fitness center. 

"(B) A diagnostic testing program that provides a re- 
ward for participation and does not base any part of the 
reward on outcomes. 

"(C) A program that encourages preventive care re- 
lated to a health condition through the waiver of the co- 
payment or deductible requirement under group health 
plan for the costs of certain items or services related to a 
health condition (such as prenatal care or well-baby visits). 

"(D) A program that reimburses individuals for the 
costs of smoking cessation programs without regard to 
whether the individual quits smoking. 

"(E) A program that provides a reward to individuals 
for attending a periodic health education seminar. 
"(3) Wellness programs subject to requirements. — If 
any of the conditions for obtaining a premium discount, rebate, 
or reward under a wellness program as described in paragraph 
(1)(C) is based on an individual satisfying a standard that is 
related to a health status factor, the wellness program shall 
not violate this section if the following requirements are com- 
plied with: 

"(A) The reward for the wellness program, together 
with the reward for other wellness programs with respect 
to the plan that requires satisfaction of a standard related 
to a health status factor, shall not exceed 30 percent of the 
cost of employee-only coverage under the plan. If, in addi- 
tion to employees or individuals, any class of dependents 
(such as spouses or spouses and dependent children) may 

June 9, 2010 



49 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1201X2705 PHSA 



participate fully in the wellness program, such reward 
shall not exceed 30 percent of the cost of the coverage in 
which an employee or individual and any dependents are 
enrolled. For purposes of this paragraph, the cost of cov- 
erage shall be determined based on the total amount of 
employer and employee contributions for the benefit pack- 
age under which the employee is (or the employee and any 
dependents are) receiving coverage. A reward may be in 
the form of a discount or rebate of a premium or contribu- 
tion, a waiver of all or part of a cost-sharing mechanism 
(such as deductibles, copayments, or coinsurance), the ab- 
sence of a surcharge, or the value of a benefit that would 
otherwise not be provided under the plan. The Secretaries 
of Labor, Health and Human Services, and the Treasury 
may increase the reward available under this subpara- 
graph to up to 50 percent of the cost of coverage if the Sec- 
retaries determine that such an increase is appropriate. 

"(B) The wellness program shall be reasonably de- 
signed to promote health or prevent disease. A program 
complies with the preceding sentence if the program has a 
reasonable chance of improving the health of, or pre- 
venting disease in, participating individuals and it is not 
overly burdensome, is not a subterfuge for discriminating 
based on a health status factor, and is not highly suspect 
in the method chosen to promote health or prevent disease. 

"(C) The plan shall give individuals eligible for the 
program the opportunity to qualify for the reward under 
the program at least once each year. 

"(D) The full reward under the wellness program shall 
be made available to all similarly situated individuals. For 
such purpose, among other things: 

"(i) The reward is not available to all similarly sit- 
uated individuals for a period unless the wellness pro- 
gram allows — 

"(I) for a reasonable alternative standard (or 
waiver of the otherwise applicable standard) for 
obtaining the reward for any individual for whom, 
for that period, it is unreasonably difficult due to 
a medical condition to satisfy the otherwise appli- 
cable standard; and 

"(II) for a reasonable alternative standard (or 
waiver of the otherwise applicable standard) for 
obtaining the reward for any individual for whom, 
for that period, it is medically inadvisable to at- 
tempt to satisfy the otherwise applicable stand- 
ard. 

"(ii) If reasonable under the circumstances, the 
plan or issuer may seek verification, such as a state- 
ment from an individual's physician, that a health sta- 
tus factor makes it unreasonably difficult or medically 
inadvisable for the individual to satisfy or attempt to 
satisfy the otherwise applicable standard. 
"(E) The plan or issuer involved shall disclose in all 
plan materials describing the terms of the wellness pro- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1201X2705 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



50 



gram the availability of a reasonable alternative standard 
(or the possibility of waiver of the otherwise applicable 
standard) required under subparagraph (D). If plan mate- 
rials disclose that such a program is available, without de- 
scribing its terms, the disclosure under this subparagraph 
shall not be required, 
"(k) Existing Programs. — Nothing in this section shall pro- 
hibit a program of health promotion or disease prevention that was 
established prior to the date of enactment of this section and ap- 
plied with all applicable regulations, and that is operating on such 
date, from continuing to be carried out for as long as such regula- 
tions remain in effect. 

"(1) Wellness Program Demonstration Project. — 

"(1) In general— Not later than July 1, 2014, the Sec- 
retary, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury and 
the Secretary of Labor, shall establish a 10-State demonstra- 
tion project under which participating States shall apply the 
provisions of subsection (j) to programs of health promotion of- 
fered by a health insurance issuer that offers health insurance 
coverage in the individual market in such State. 

"(2) Expansion of demonstration project. — If the Sec- 
retary, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury and 
the Secretary of Labor, determines that the demonstration 
project described in paragraph (1) is effective, such Secretaries 
may, beginning on July 1, 2017 expand such demonstration 
project to include additional participating States. 
"(3) Requirements. — 

"(A) Maintenance of coverage. — The Secretary, in 
consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury and the 
Secretary of Labor, shall not approve the participation of 
a State in the demonstration project under this section un- 
less the Secretaries determine that the State's project is 
designed in a manner that — 

"(i) will not result in any decrease in coverage; 

and 

"(ii) will not increase the cost to the Federal Gov- 
ernment in providing credits under section 36B of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or cost-sharing assist- 
ance under section 1402 of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act. 

"(B) Other requirements. — States that participate in 
the demonstration project under this subsection — 

"(i) may permit premium discounts or rebates or 
the modification of otherwise applicable copayments or 
deductibles for adherence to, or participation in, a rea- 
sonably designed program of health promotion and 
disease prevention; 

"(ii) shall ensure that requirements of consumer 
protection are met in programs of health promotion in 
the individual market; 

"(hi) shall require verification from health insur- 
ance issuers that offer health insurance coverage in 
the individual market of such State that premium dis- 
counts — 

June 9, 2010 



51 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1201\2706 PHSA 



"(I) do not create undue burdens for individ- 
uals insured in the individual market; 
"(II) do not lead to cost shifting; and 
"(III) are not a subterfuge for discrimination; 
"(iv) shall ensure that consumer data is protected 
in accordance with the requirements of section 264(c) 
of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. 1320d-2 note); and 

"(v) shall ensure and demonstrate to the satisfac- 
tion of the Secretary that the discounts or other re- 
wards provided under the project reflect the expected 
level of participation in the wellness program involved 
and the anticipated effect the program will have on 
utilization or medical claim costs, 
"(m) Report. — 

"(1) In general. — Not later than 3 years after the date of 
enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 
the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treas- 
ury and the Secretary of Labor, shall submit a report to the 
appropriate committees of Congress concerning — 

"(A) the effectiveness of wellness programs (as defined 
in subsection (j)) in promoting health and preventing dis- 
ease; 

"(B) the impact of such wellness programs on the ac- 
cess to care and affordability of coverage for participants 
and non-participants of such programs; 

"(C) the impact of premium-based and cost-sharing in- 
centives on participant behavior and the role of such pro- 
grams in changing behavior; and 

"(D) the effectiveness of different types of rewards. 
"(2) Data collection. — In preparing the report described 
in paragraph (1), the Secretaries shall gather relevant informa- 
tion from employers who provide employees with access to 
wellness programs, including State and Federal agencies, 
"(n) Regulations. — Nothing in this section shall be construed 
as prohibiting the Secretaries of Labor, Health and Human Serv- 
ices, or the Treasury from promulgating regulations in connection 
with this section. 

"SEC. 2706 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-5]. NON-DISCRIMINATION IN HEALTH CARE. 

"(a) Providers. — A group health plan and a health insurance 
issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage shall 
not discriminate with respect to participation under the plan or 
coverage against any health care provider who is acting within the 
scope of that provider's license or certification under applicable 
State law. This section shall not require that a group health plan 
or health insurance issuer contract with any health care provider 
willing to abide by the terms and conditions for participation estab- 
lished by the plan or issuer. Nothing in this section shall be con- 
strued as preventing a group health plan, a health insurance 
issuer, or the Secretary from establishing varying reimbursement 
rates based on quality or performance measures. 

"(b) Individuals. — The provisions of section 1558 of the Pa- 
tient Protection and Affordable Care Act (relating to non-discrimi- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1201X2707 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



52 



nation) shall apply with respect to a group health plan or health 
insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance cov- 
erage. 

"SEC. 2707 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-6]. COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH INSURANCE 
COVERAGE. 

"(a) Coverage for Essential Health Benefits Package. — A 
health insurance issuer that offers health insurance coverage in the 
individual or small group market shall ensure that such coverage 
includes the essential health benefits package required under sec- 
tion 1302(a) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 

"(b) Cost-sharing Under Group Health Plans. — A group 
health plan shall ensure that any annual cost-sharing imposed 
under the plan does not exceed the limitations provided for under 
paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 1302(c). 

"(c) Child-only Plans. — If a health insurance issuer offers 
health insurance coverage in any level of coverage specified under 
section 1302(d) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 
the issuer shall also offer such coverage in that level as a plan in 
which the only enrollees are individuals who, as of the beginning 
of a plan year, have not attained the age of 21. 

"(d) Dental Only. — This section shall not apply to a plan de- 
scribed in section 1302(d)(2)(B)(ii)(I). 

"SEC. 2708 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-7]. PROHIBITION ON EXCESSP7E WAITING 
PERIODS. 

"[As revised by section 10103(b)~\ A group health plan and a 
health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage 
shall not apply any waiting period (as defined in section 2704(b)(4)) 
that exceeds 90 days. 

"SEC. 2709 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-8]. COVERAGE FOR INDP7IDUALS PARTICI- 
PATING IN APPROVED CLINICAL TRIALS. 

[Section added by section 10103(c)~\ 
"(a) Coverage — 

"(1) In general. — If a group health plan or a health insur- 
ance issuer offering group or individual health insurance cov- 
erage provides coverage to a qualified individual, then such 
plan or issuer — 

"(A) may not deny the individual participation in the 
clinical trial referred to in subsection (b)(2); 

"(B) subject to subsection (c), may not deny (or limit 
or impose additional conditions on) the coverage of routine 
patient costs for items and services furnished in connection 
with participation in the trial; and 

"(C) may not discriminate against the individual on 
the basis of the individual's participation in such trial. 
"(2) Routine patient costs. — 

"(A) Inclusion. — For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), 
subject to subparagraph (B), routine patient costs include 
all items and services consistent with the coverage pro- 
vided in the plan (or coverage) that is typically covered for 
a qualified individual who is not enrolled in a clinical trial. 

"(B) Exclusion. — For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), 
routine patient costs does not include — 

June 9, 2010 



53 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1201X2709 PHSA 



"(i) the investigational item, device, or service, 
itself; 

"(ii) items and services that are provided solely to 
satisfy data collection and analysis needs and that are 
not used in the direct clinical management of the pa- 
tient; or 

"(hi) a service that is clearly inconsistent with 
widely accepted and established standards of care for 
a particular diagnosis. 
"(3) Use of in-network providers. — If one or more par- 
ticipating providers is participating in a clinical trial, nothing 
in paragraph (1) shall be construed as preventing a plan or 
issuer from requiring that a qualified individual participate in 
the trial through such a participating provider if the provider 
will accept the individual as a participant in the trial. 

"(4) Use of out-of-network. — Notwithstanding para- 
graph (3), paragraph (1) shall apply to a qualified individual 
participating in an approved clinical trial that is conducted 
outside the State in which the qualified individual resides. 
"(b) Qualified Individual Defined. — For purposes of sub- 
section (a), the term 'qualified individual' means an individual who 
is a participant or beneficiary in a health plan or with coverage de- 
scribed in subsection (a)(1) and who meets the following conditions: 
"(1) The individual is eligible to participate in an approved 
clinical trial according to the trial protocol with respect to 
treatment of cancer or other life-threatening disease or condi- 
tion. 

"(2) Either— 

"(A) the referring health care professional is a partici- 
pating health care provider and has concluded that the in- 
dividual's participation in such trial would be appropriate 
based upon the individual meeting the conditions de- 
scribed in paragraph (1); or 

"(B) the participant or beneficiary provides medical 
and scientific information establishing that the individual's 
participation in such trial would be appropriate based 
upon the individual meeting the conditions described in 
paragraph (1). 

"(c) Limitations on Coverage. — This section shall not be con- 
strued to require a group health plan, or a health insurance issuer 
offering group or individual health insurance coverage, to provide 
benefits for routine patient care services provided outside of the 
plan's (or coverage's) health care provider network unless out-of- 
network benefits are otherwise provided under the plan (or cov- 
erage). 

"(d) Approved Clinical Trial Defined. — 

"(1) In general. — In this section, the term 'approved clin- 
ical trial' means a phase I, phase II, phase III, or phase IV 
clinical trial that is conducted in relation to the prevention, de- 
tection, or treatment of cancer or other life-threatening disease 
or condition and is described in any of the following subpara- 
graphs: 

"(A) Federally funded trials. — The study or inves- 
tigation is approved or funded (which may include funding 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1201X2709 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



54 



through in-kind contributions) by one or more of the fol- 
lowing: 

"(i) The National Institutes of Health, 
"(ii) The Centers for Disease Control and Preven- 
tion. 

"(hi) The Agency for Health Care Research and 
Quality. 

"(iv) The Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Serv- 
ices. 

"(v) cooperative group or center of any of the enti- 
ties described in clauses (i) through (iv) or the Depart- 
ment of Defense or the Department of Veterans Af- 
fairs. 

"(vi) A qualified non-governmental research entity 
identified in the guidelines issued by the National In- 
stitutes of Health for center support grants. 

"(vii) Any of the following if the conditions de- 
scribed in paragraph (2) are met: 

"(I) The Department of Veterans Affairs. 
"(II) The Department of Defense. 
"(Ill) The Department of Energy. 
"(B) The study or investigation is conducted under an 
investigational new drug application reviewed by the Food 
and Drug Administration. 

"(C) The study or investigation is a drug trial that is 
exempt from having such an investigational new drug ap- 
plication. 

"(2) Conditions for departments. — The conditions de- 
scribed in this paragraph, for a study or investigation con- 
ducted by a Department, are that the study or investigation 
has been reviewed and approved through a system of peer re- 
view that the Secretary determines — 

"(A) to be comparable to the system of peer review of 
studies and investigations used by the National Institutes 
of Health, and 

"(B) assures unbiased review of the highest scientific 
standards by qualified individuals who have no interest in 
the outcome of the review. 
"(e) Life-threatening Condition Defined. — In this section, 
the term 'life-threatening condition' means any disease or condition 
from which the likelihood of death is probable unless the course of 
the disease or condition is interrupted. 

"(f) Construction. — Nothing in this section shall be construed 
to limit a plan's or issuer's coverage with respect to clinical trials. 

"(g) Application to FEHBP. — Notwithstanding any provision 
of chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, this section shall apply 
to health plans offered under the program under such chapter. 

"(h) Preemption. — Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
Act, nothing in this section shall preempt State laws that require 
a clinical trials policy for State regulated health insurance plans 
that is in addition to the policy required under this section.". 

June 9, 2010 



55 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1251 



PART 2— OTHER PROVISIONS 

SEC. 1251 [42 U.S.C. 18011]. PRESERVATION OF RIGHT TO MAINTAIN 
EXISTING COVERAGE. 

(a) No Changes to Existing Coverage. — 

(1) In general. — Nothing in this Act (or an amendment 
made by this Act) shall be construed to require that an indi- 
vidual terminate coverage under a group health plan or health 
insurance coverage in which such individual was enrolled on 
the date of enactment of this Act. 

(2) Continuation of coverage. — [As revised by section 
10103(d)(1)] Except as provided in paragraph (3), with respect 
to a group health plan or health insurance coverage in which 
an individual was enrolled on the date of enactment of this 
Act, this subtitle and subtitle A (and the amendments made by 
such subtitles) shall not apply to such plan or coverage, regard- 
less of whether the individual renews such coverage after such 
date of enactment. 

(3) Application of certain provisions. — [As added by 
section 10103(d)(1)] The provisions of sections 2715 and 2718 
of the Public Health Service Act (as added by subtitle A) shall 
apply to grandfathered health plans for plan years beginning 
on or after the date of enactment of this Act. 

(4) Application of certain provisions. — [As added by 
section 2301(a) of HCERA] 

(A) In general. — The following provisions of the Pub- 
lic Health Service Act (as added by this title) shall apply 
to grandfathered health plans for plan years beginning 
with the first plan year to which such provisions would 
otherwise apply: 

(i) Section 2708 (relating to excessive waiting peri- 
ods). 

(ii) Those provisions of section 2711 relating to 
lifetime limits. 

(hi) Section 2712 (relating to rescissions), 
(iv) Section 2714 (relating to extension of depend- 
ent coverage). 

(B) Provisions applicable only to group health 

PLANS. — 

(i) Provisions described. — Those provisions of 
section 2711 relating to annual limits and the provi- 
sions of section 2704 (relating to pre-existing condition 
exclusions) of the Public Health Service Act (as added 
by this subtitle) shall apply to grandfathered health 
plans that are group health plans for plan years begin- 
ning with the first plan year to which such provisions 
otherwise apply. 

(ii) Adult child coverage. — For plan years be- 
ginning before January 1, 2014, the provisions of sec- 
tion 2714 of the Public Health Service Act (as added 
by this subtitle) shall apply in the case of an adult 
child with respect to a grandfathered health plan that 
is a group health plan only if such adult child is not 
eligible to enroll in an eligible employer-sponsored 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1252 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



56 



health plan (as defined in section 5000A(f)(2) of the In- 
ternal Revenue Code of 1986) other than such grand- 
fathered health plan. 

(b) Allowance for Family Members to Join Current Cov- 
erage. — With respect to a group health plan or health insurance 
coverage in which an individual was enrolled on the date of enact- 
ment of this Act and which is renewed after such date, family 
members of such individual shall be permitted to enroll in such 
plan or coverage if such enrollment is permitted under the terms 
of the plan in effect as of such date of enactment. 

(c) Allowance for New Employees to Join Current 
Plan. — A group health plan that provides coverage on the date of 
enactment of this Act may provide for the enrolling of new employ- 
ees (and their families) in such plan, and this subtitle and subtitle 
A (and the amendments made by such subtitles) shall not apply 
with respect to such plan and such new employees (and their fami- 
lies). 

(d) Effect on Collective Bargaining Agreements. — In the 
case of health insurance coverage maintained pursuant to one or 
more collective bargaining agreements between employee rep- 
resentatives and one or more employers that was ratified before 
the date of enactment of this Act, the provisions of this subtitle and 
subtitle A (and the amendments made by such subtitles) shall not 
apply until the date on which the last of the collective bargaining 
agreements relating to the coverage terminates. Any coverage 
amendment made pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement 
relating to the coverage which amends the coverage solely to con- 
form to any requirement added by this subtitle or subtitle A (or 
amendments) shall not be treated as a termination of such collec- 
tive bargaining agreement. 

(e) Definition. — In this title, the term "grandfathered health 
plan" means any group health plan or health insurance coverage 
to which this section applies. 

SEC. 1252 [42 U.S.C. 18012]. RATING REFORMS MUST APPLY UNI- 
FORMLY TO ALL HEALTH INSURANCE ISSUERS AND 
GROUP HEALTH PLANS. 

Any standard or requirement adopted by a State pursuant to 
this title, or any amendment made by this title, shall be applied 
uniformly to all health plans in each insurance market to which 
the standard and requirements apply. The preceding sentence shall 
also apply to a State standard or requirement relating to the stand- 
ard or requirement required by this title (or any such amendment) 
that is not the same as the standard or requirement but that is not 
preempted under section 1321(d). 

SEC. 1253 [42 U.S.C. 18013]. ANNUAL REPORT ON SELF-INSURED 
PLANS. 

Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, 
and annually thereafter, the Secretary of Labor shall prepare an 
aggregate annual report, using data collected from the Annual Re- 
turn/Report of Employee Benefit Plan (Department of Labor Form 
5500), that shall include general information on self-insured group 
health plans (including plan type, number of participants, benefits 
offered, funding arrangements, and benefit arrangements) as well 
as data from the financial filings of self-insured employers (includ- 

June 9, 2010 



57 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1255 



ing information on assets, liabilities, contributions, investments, 
and expenses). The Secretary shall submit such reports to the ap- 
propriate committees of Congress. 

{Section 1253 added by section 10103(f)(2)] 

SEC. 1254. STUDY OF LARGE GROUP MARKET. 

[Section 1254 added by section 10103(f)(2)] 

(a) In General. — The Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices shall conduct a study of the fully-insured and self-insured 
group health plan markets to — 

(1) compare the characteristics of employers (including in- 
dustry, size, and other characteristics as determined appro- 
priate by the Secretary), health plan benefits, financial sol- 
vency, capital reserve levels, and the risks of becoming insol- 
vent; and 

(2) determine the extent to which new insurance market 
reforms are likely to cause adverse selection in the large group 
market or to encourage small and midsize employers to self-in- 
sure. 

(b) Collection of Information. — In conducting the study 
under subsection (a), the Secretary, in coordination with the Sec- 
retary of Labor, shall collect information and analyze — 

(1) the extent to which self-insured group health plans can 
offer less costly coverage and, if so, whether lower costs are 
due to more efficient plan administration and lower overhead 
or to the denial of claims and the offering very limited benefit 
packages; 

(2) claim denial rates, plan benefit fluctuations (to evalu- 
ate the extent that plans scale back health benefits during eco- 
nomic downturns), and the impact of the limited recourse op- 
tions on consumers; and 

(3) any potential conflict of interest as it relates to the 
health care needs of self-insured enrollees and self-insured em- 
ployer's financial contribution or profit margin, and the impact 
of such conflict on administration of the health plan. 

(c) Report. — Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the appropriate commit- 
tees of Congress a report concerning the results of the study con- 
ducted under subsection (a). 

SEC. 1255. EFFECTIVE DATES. 

[As revised by section 10103(e) and redesignated by section 
10103(f)(l)~\ This subtitle (and the amendments made by this sub- 
title) shall become effective for plan years beginning on or after 
January 1, 2014, except that — 

(1) section 1251 shall take effect on the date of enactment 
of this Act; and 

(2) the provisions of section 2704 of the Public Health 
Service Act (as amended by section 1201), as they apply to en- 
rollees who are under 19 years of age, shall become effective 
for plan years beginning on or after the date that is 6 months 
after the date of enactment of this Act. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1301 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



58 



Subtitle D — Available Coverage Choices for 
All Americans 

PART 1— ESTABLISHMENT OF QUALIFIED 
HEALTH PLANS 

SEC. 1301 [42 U.S.C. 18021]. QUALIFIED HEALTH PLAN DEFINED. 

(a) Qualified Health Plan. — In this title: 

(1) In general. — The term "qualified health plan" means 
a health plan that — 

(A) has in effect a certification (which may include a 
seal or other indication of approval) that such plan meets 
the criteria for certification described in section 1311(c) 
issued or recognized by each Exchange through which such 
plan is offered; 

(B) provides the essential health benefits package de- 
scribed in section 1302(a); and 

(C) is offered by a health insurance issuer that — 

(i) is licensed and in good standing to offer health 
insurance coverage in each State in which such issuer 
offers health insurance coverage under this title; 

(ii) agrees to offer at least one qualified health 
plan in the silver level and at least one plan in the 
gold level in each such Exchange; 

(iii) agrees to charge the same premium rate for 
each qualified health plan of the issuer without regard 
to whether the plan is offered through an Exchange or 
whether the plan is offered directly from the issuer or 
through an agent; and 

(iv) complies with the regulations developed by 
the Secretary under section 1311(d) and such other re- 
quirements as an applicable Exchange may establish. 

[Paragraphs (2)-(4) substituted for previous paragraph (2) by 
section 10104(a)~\ 

(2) Inclusion of co-op plans and multi-state qualified 
HEALTH PLANS. — Any reference in this title to a qualified 
health plan shall be deemed to include a qualified health plan 
offered through the CO-OP program under section 1322, and a 
multi-State plan under section 1334, unless specifically pro- 
vided for otherwise. 

(3) Treatment of qualified direct primary care med- 
ical home plans. — The Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices shall permit a qualified health plan to provide coverage 
through a qualified direct primary care medical home plan that 
meets criteria established by the Secretary, so long as the 
qualified health plan meets all requirements that are other- 
wise applicable and the services covered by the medical home 
plan are coordinated with the entity offering the qualified 
health plan. 

(4) Variation based on rating area. — A qualified health 
plan, including a multi-State qualified health plan, may as ap- 
propriate vary premiums by rating area (as defined in section 
2701(a)(2) of the Public Health Service Act). 

June 9, 2010 



59 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1302 



(b) Terms Relating to Health Plans. — In this title: 

(1) Health plan. — 

(A) In general. — The term "health plan" means 
health insurance coverage and a group health plan. 

(B) Exception for self-insured plans and mewas. — 
Except to the extent specifically provided by this title, the 
term "health plan" shall not include a group health plan 
or multiple employer welfare arrangement to the extent 
the plan or arrangement is not subject to State insurance 
regulation under section 514 of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974. 

(2) Health insurance coverage and issuer. — The terms 
"health insurance coverage" and "health insurance issuer" have 
the meanings given such terms by section 2791(b) of the Public 
Health Service Act. 

(3) Group health plan. — The term "group health plan" 
has the meaning given such term by section 2791(a) of the 
Public Health Service Act. 

SEC. 1302 [42 U.S.C 18022]. ESSENTIAL HEALTH BENEFITS REQUIRE- 
MENTS. 

(a) Essential Health Benefits Package. — In this title, the 
term "essential health benefits package" means, with respect to 
any health plan, coverage that — 

(1) provides for the essential health benefits defined by the 
Secretary under subsection (b); 

(2) limits cost-sharing for such coverage in accordance with 
subsection (c); and 

(3) subject to subsection (e), provides either the bronze, sil- 
ver, gold, or platinum level of coverage described in subsection 
(d). 

(b) Essential Health Benefits. — 

(1) In general. — Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary 
shall define the essential health benefits, except that such ben- 
efits shall include at least the following general categories and 
the items and services covered within the categories: 

(A) Ambulatory patient services. 

(B) Emergency services. 

(C) Hospitalization. 

(D) Maternity and newborn care. 

(E) Mental health and substance use disorder services, 
including behavioral health treatment. 

(F) Prescription drugs. 

(G) Rehabilitative and habilitative services and de- 
vices. 

(H) Laboratory services. 

(I) Preventive and wellness services and chronic dis- 
ease management. 

(J) Pediatric services, including oral and vision care. 

(2) Limitation. — 

(A) In general. — The Secretary shall ensure that the 
scope of the essential health benefits under paragraph (1) 
is equal to the scope of benefits provided under a typical 
employer plan, as determined by the Secretary. To inform 
this determination, the Secretary of Labor shall conduct a 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1302 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



60 



survey of employer-sponsored coverage to determine the 
benefits typically covered by employers, including multiem- 
ployer plans, and provide a report on such survey to the 
Secretary. 

(B) Certification. — In defining the essential health 
benefits described in paragraph (1), and in revising the 
benefits under paragraph (4)(H), the Secretary shall sub- 
mit a report to the appropriate committees of Congress 
containing a certification from the Chief Actuary of the 
Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services that such essen- 
tial health benefits meet the limitation described in para- 
graph (2). 

(3) Notice and hearing. — In defining the essential health 
benefits described in paragraph (1), and in revising the bene- 
fits under paragraph (4)(H), the Secretary shall provide notice 
and an opportunity for public comment. 

(4) Required elements for consideration. — In defining 
the essential health benefits under paragraph (1), the Sec- 
retary shall — 

(A) ensure that such essential health benefits reflect 
an appropriate balance among the categories described in 
such subsection, so that benefits are not unduly weighted 
toward any category; 

(B) not make coverage decisions, determine reimburse- 
ment rates, establish incentive programs, or design bene- 
fits in ways that discriminate against individuals because 
of their age, disability, or expected length of life; 

(C) take into account the health care needs of diverse 
segments of the population, including women, children, 
persons with disabilities, and other groups; 

(D) ensure that health benefits established as essen- 
tial not be subject to denial to individuals against their 
wishes on the basis of the individuals' age or expected 
length of life or of the individuals' present or predicted dis- 
ability, degree of medical dependency, or quality of life; 

(E) provide that a qualified health plan shall not be 
treated as providing coverage for the essential health ben- 
efits described in paragraph (1) unless the plan provides 
that— 

(i) coverage for emergency department services 
will be provided without imposing any requirement 
under the plan for prior authorization of services or 
any limitation on coverage where the provider of serv- 
ices does not have a contractual relationship with the 
plan for the providing of services that is more restric- 
tive than the requirements or limitations that apply to 
emergency department services received from pro- 
viders who do have such a contractual relationship 
with the plan; and 

(ii) if such services are provided out-of-network, 
the cost-sharing requirement (expressed as a copay- 
ment amount or coinsurance rate) is the same require- 
ment that would apply if such services were provided 
in-network; 

June 9, 2010 



61 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1302 



(F) provide that if a plan described in section 
1311(b)(2)(B)(ii) (relating to stand-alone dental benefits 
plans) is offered through an Exchange, another health plan 
offered through such Exchange shall not fail to be treated 
as a qualified health plan solely because the plan does not 
offer coverage of benefits offered through the stand-alone 
plan that are otherwise required under paragraph (1)(J); 
and 

(G) periodically review the essential health benefits 
under paragraph (1), and provide a report to Congress and 
the public that contains — 

(i) an assessment of whether enrollees are facing 
any difficulty accessing needed services for reasons of 
coverage or cost; 

(ii) an assessment of whether the essential health 
benefits needs to be modified or updated to account for 
changes in medical evidence or scientific advancement; 

(iii) information on how the essential health bene- 
fits will be modified to address any such gaps in access 
or changes in the evidence base; 

(iv) an assessment of the potential of additional or 
expanded benefits to increase costs and the inter- 
actions between the addition or expansion of benefits 
and reductions in existing benefits to meet actuarial 
limitations described in paragraph (2); and 

(H) periodically update the essential health benefits 
under paragraph (1) to address any gaps in access to cov- 
erage or changes in the evidence base the Secretary identi- 
fies in the review conducted under subparagraph (G). 

(5) Rule of construction. — Nothing in this title shall be 
construed to prohibit a health plan from providing benefits in 
excess of the essential health benefits described in this sub- 
section. 

(c) Requirements Relating to Cost-Sharing. — 
(1) Annual limitation on cost-sharing. — 

(A) 2014. — The cost-sharing incurred under a health 
plan with respect to self-only coverage or coverage other 
than self-only coverage for a plan year beginning in 2014 
shall not exceed the dollar amounts in effect under section 
223(c)(2)(A)(ii) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for 
self-only and family coverage, respectively, for taxable 
years beginning in 2014. 

(B) 2015 AND LATER. — In the case of any plan year be- 
ginning in a calendar year after 2014, the limitation under 
this paragraph shall — 

(i) in the case of self-only coverage, be equal to the 
dollar amount under subparagraph (A) for self-only 
coverage for plan years beginning in 2014, increased 
by an amount equal to the product of that amount and 
the premium adjustment percentage under paragraph 
(4) for the calendar year; and 

(ii) in the case of other coverage, twice the amount 
in effect under clause (i). 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1302 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



62 



If the amount of any increase under clause (i) is not a mul- 
tiple of $50, such increase shall be rounded to the next 
lowest multiple of $50. 

(2) Annual limitation on deductibles for employer- 
sponsored PLANS. — 

(A) In general. — In the case of a health plan offered 
in the small group market, the deductible under the plan 
shall not exceed — 

(i) $2,000 in the case of a plan covering a single 
individual; and 

(ii) $4,000 in the case of any other plan. 

The amounts under clauses (i) and (ii) may be increased by 
the maximum amount of reimbursement which is reason- 
ably available to a participant under a flexible spending 
arrangement described in section 106(c)(2) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 (determined without regard to any 
salary reduction arrangement). 

(B) Indexing of limits. — In the case of any plan year 
beginning in a calendar year after 2014 — 

(i) the dollar amount under subparagraph (A)(i) 
shall be increased by an amount equal to the product 
of that amount and the premium adjustment percent- 
age under paragraph (4) for the calendar year; and 

(ii) the dollar amount under subparagraph (A)(ii) 
shall be increased to an amount equal to twice the 
amount in effect under subparagraph (A)(i) for plan 
years beginning in the calendar year, determined after 
application of clause (i). 

If the amount of any increase under clause (i) is not a mul- 
tiple of $50, such increase shall be rounded to the next 
lowest multiple of $50. 

(C) Actuarial value. — The limitation under this 
paragraph shall be applied in such a manner so as to not 
affect the actuarial value of any health plan, including a 
plan in the bronze level. 

(D) Coordination with preventive limits. — Nothing 
in this paragraph shall be construed to allow a plan to 
have a deductible under the plan apply to benefits de- 
scribed in section 2713 of the Public Health Service Act. 

(3) Cost-sharing— In this title — 

(A) In general. — The term "cost-sharing" includes — 

(i) deductibles, coinsurance, copayments, or simi- 
lar charges; and 

(ii) any other expenditure required of an insured 
individual which is a qualified medical expense (with- 
in the meaning of section 223(d)(2) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986) with respect to essential health 
benefits covered under the plan. 

(B) Exceptions. — Such term does not include pre- 
miums, balance billing amounts for non-network providers, 
or spending for non-covered services. 

(4) Premium adjustment percentage. — For purposes of 
paragraphs (l)(B)(i) and (2)(B)(i), the premium adjustment per- 
centage for any calendar year is the percentage (if any) by 

June 9, 2010 



63 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1302 



which the average per capita premium for health insurance 
coverage in the United States for the preceding calendar year 
(as estimated by the Secretary no later than October 1 of such 
preceding calendar year) exceeds such average per capita pre- 
mium for 2013 (as determined by the Secretary), 
(d) Levels of Coverage. — 

(1) Levels of coverage defined. — The levels of coverage 
described in this subsection are as follows: 

(A) Bronze level. — A plan in the bronze level shall 
provide a level of coverage that is designed to provide ben- 
efits that are actuarially equivalent to 60 percent of the 
full actuarial value of the benefits provided under the 
plan. 

(B) Silver level. — A plan in the silver level shall pro- 
vide a level of coverage that is designed to provide benefits 
that are actuarially equivalent to 70 percent of the full ac- 
tuarial value of the benefits provided under the plan. 

(C) Gold level. — A plan in the gold level shall pro- 
vide a level of coverage that is designed to provide benefits 
that are actuarially equivalent to 80 percent of the full ac- 
tuarial value of the benefits provided under the plan. 

(D) Platinum level. — A plan in the platinum level 
shall provide a level of coverage that is designed to provide 
benefits that are actuarially equivalent to 90 percent of 
the full actuarial value of the benefits provided under the 
plan. 

(2) Actuarial value. — 

(A) In general. — Under regulations issued by the Sec- 
retary, the level of coverage of a plan shall be determined 
on the basis that the essential health benefits described in 
subsection (b) shall be provided to a standard population 
(and without regard to the population the plan may actu- 
ally provide benefits to). 

(B) Employer contributions. — [As revised by section 
10104(b)(1)] The Secretary shall issue regulations under 
which employer contributions to a health savings account 
(within the meaning of section 223 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986) may be taken into account in determining 
the level of coverage for a plan of the employer. 

(C) Application. — In determining under this title, the 
Public Health Service Act, or the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986 the percentage of the total allowed costs of benefits 
provided under a group health plan or health insurance 
coverage that are provided by such plan or coverage, the 
rules contained in the regulations under this paragraph 
shall apply. 

(3) Allowable variance. — The Secretary shall develop 
guidelines to provide for a de minimis variation in the actu- 
arial valuations used in determining the level of coverage of a 
plan to account for differences in actuarial estimates. 

(4) Plan reference. — In this title, any reference to a 
bronze, silver, gold, or platinum plan shall be treated as a ref- 
erence to a qualified health plan providing a bronze, silver, 
gold, or platinum level of coverage, as the case may be. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1303 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



64 



(e) Catastrophic Plan. — 

(1) In general. — A health plan not providing a bronze, sil- 
ver, gold, or platinum level of coverage shall be treated as 
meeting the requirements of subsection (d) with respect to any 
plan year if — 

(A) the only individuals who are eligible to enroll in 
the plan are individuals described in paragraph (2); and 

(B) the plan provides — 

(i) except as provided in clause (ii), the essential 
health benefits determined under subsection (b), ex- 
cept that the plan provides no benefits for any plan 
year until the individual has incurred cost-sharing ex- 
penses in an amount equal to the annual limitation in 
effect under subsection (c)(1) for the plan year (except 
as provided for in section 2713); and 

(ii) coverage for at least three primary care visits. 

(2) Individuals eligible for enrollment. — An indi- 
vidual is described in this paragraph for any plan year if the 
individual — 

(A) has not attained the age of 30 before the beginning 
of the plan year; or 

(B) has a certification in effect for any plan year under 
this title that the individual is exempt from the require- 
ment under section 5000A of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 by reason of — 

(i) section 5000A(e)(l) of such Code (relating to in- 
dividuals without affordable coverage); or 

(ii) section 5000A(e)(5) of such Code (relating to 
individuals with hardships). 

(3) Restriction to individual market. — If a health in- 
surance issuer offers a health plan described in this subsection, 
the issuer may only offer the plan in the individual market. 

(f) Child-only Plans. — If a qualified health plan is offered 
through the Exchange in any level of coverage specified under sub- 
section (d), the issuer shall also offer that plan through the Ex- 
change in that level as a plan in which the only enrollees are indi- 
viduals who, as of the beginning of a plan year, have not attained 
the age of 21, and such plan shall be treated as a qualified health 
plan. 

(g) Payments to Federally-qualified Health Centers. — 
[As added by section 10104(b)(2)~\ If any item or service covered by 
a qualified health plan is provided by a Federally-qualified health 
center (as defined in section 1905(1)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396d(l)(2)(B)) to an enrollee of the plan, the offeror of 
the plan shall pay to the center for the item or service an amount 
that is not less than the amount of payment that would have been 
paid to the center under section 1902(bb) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396a(bb)) for such item or service. 

SEC. 1303 [42 U.S.C. 18023]. SPECIAL RULES. 

[Replaced by section 10104(c)~\ 

(a) State Opt-out of Abortion Coverage. — 

(1) In general. — A State may elect to prohibit abortion 
coverage in qualified health plans offered through an Exchange 

June 9, 2010 



65 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1303 



in such State if such State enacts a law to provide for such pro- 
hibition. 

(2) Termination of opt out. — A State may repeal a law 
described in paragraph (1) and provide for the offering of such 
services through the Exchange. 

(b) Special Rules Relating to Coverage of Abortion Serv- 
ices. — 

(1) Voluntary choice of coverage of abortion serv- 
ices. — 

(A) In general. — Notwithstanding any other provision 
of this title (or any amendment made by this title) — 

(i) nothing in this title (or any amendment made 
by this title), shall be construed to require a qualified 
health plan to provide coverage of services described 
in subparagraph (B)(i) or (B)(ii) as part of its essential 
health benefits for any plan year; and 

(ii) subject to subsection (a), the issuer of a quali- 
fied health plan shall determine whether or not the 
plan provides coverage of services described in sub- 
paragraph (B)(i) or (B)(ii) as part of such benefits for 
the plan year. 

(B) Abortion services. — 

(i) Abortions for which public funding is pro- 
hibited. — The services described in this clause are 
abortions for which the expenditure of Federal funds 
appropriated for the Department of Health and 
Human Services is not permitted, based on the law as 
in effect as of the date that is 6 months before the be- 
ginning of the plan year involved. 

(ii) Abortions for which public funding is al- 
lowed. — The services described in this clause are 
abortions for which the expenditure of Federal funds 
appropriated for the Department of Health and 
Human Services is permitted, based on the law as in 
effect as of the date that is 6 months before the begin- 
ning of the plan year involved. 

(2) Prohibition on the use of federal funds. — 

(A) In general. — If a qualified health plan provides 
coverage of services described in paragraph (l)(B)(i), the 
issuer of the plan shall not use any amount attributable 
to any of the following for purposes of paying for such 
services: 

(i) The credit under section 36B of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 (and the amount (if any) of the 
advance payment of the credit under section 1412 of 
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act). 

(ii) Any cost-sharing reduction under section 1402 
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (and 
the amount (if any) of the advance payment of the re- 
duction under section 1412 of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act). 

(B) Establishment of allocation accounts. — In the 
case of a plan to which subparagraph (A) applies, the 
issuer of the plan shall — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1303 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



66 



(i) collect from each enrollee in the plan (without 
regard to the enrollee's age, sex, or family status) a 
separate payment for each of the following: 

(I) an amount equal to the portion of the pre- 
mium to be paid directly by the enrollee for cov- 
erage under the plan of services other than serv- 
ices described in paragraph (l)(B)(i) (after reduc- 
tion for credits and cost-sharing reductions de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A)); and 

(II) an amount equal to the actuarial value of 
the coverage of services described in paragraph 
(l)(B)(i), and 

(ii) shall deposit all such separate payments into 
separate allocation accounts as provided in subpara- 
graph (C). 

In the case of an enrollee whose premium for coverage 
under the plan is paid through employee payroll deposit, 
the separate payments required under this subparagraph 
shall each be paid by a separate deposit. 

(C) Segregation of funds. — 

(i) In general. — The issuer of a plan to which 
subparagraph (A) applies shall establish allocation ac- 
counts described in clause (ii) for enrollees receiving 
amounts described in subparagraph (A). 

(ii) Allocation accounts. — The issuer of a plan 
to which subparagraph (A) applies shall deposit — 

(I) all payments described in subparagraph 
(B)(i)(I) into a separate account that consists sole- 
ly of such payments and that is used exclusively 
to pay for services other than services described in 
paragraph (l)(B)(i); and 

(II) all payments described in subparagraph 
(B)(i)(II) into a separate account that consists sole- 
ly of such payments and that is used exclusively 
to pay for services described in paragraph 

dXBXi). 

(D) Actuarial value. — 

(i) In general. — The issuer of a qualified health 
plan shall estimate the basic per enrollee, per month 
cost, determined on an average actuarial basis, for in- 
cluding coverage under the qualified health plan of the 
services described in paragraph (l)(B)(i). 

(ii) Considerations. — In making such estimate, 
the issuer — 

(I) may take into account the impact on over- 
all costs of the inclusion of such coverage, but may 
not take into account any cost reduction estimated 
to result from such services, including prenatal 
care, delivery, or postnatal care; 

(II) shall estimate such costs as if such cov- 
erage were included for the entire population cov- 
ered; and 

(III) may not estimate such a cost at less than 
$1 per enrollee, per month. 

June 9, 2010 



67 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1303 



(E) Ensuring compliance with segregation re- 
quirements. — 

(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), State 
health insurance commissioners shall ensure that 
health plans comply with the segregation require- 
ments in this subsection through the segregation of 
plan funds in accordance with applicable provisions of 
generally accepted accounting requirements, circulars 
on funds management of the Office of Management 
and Budget, and guidance on accounting of the Gov- 
ernment Accountability Office. 

(ii) Clarification. — Nothing in clause (i) shall 
prohibit the right of an individual or health plan to 
appeal such action in courts of competent jurisdiction. 

(3) Rules relating to notice. — 

(A) Notice. — A qualified health plan that provides for 
coverage of the services described in paragraph (l)(B)(i) 
shall provide a notice to enrollees, only as part of the sum- 
mary of benefits and coverage explanation, at the time of 
enrollment, of such coverage. 

(B) Rules relating to payments. — The notice de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A), any advertising used by the 
issuer with respect to the plan, any information provided 
by the Exchange, and any other information specified by 
the Secretary shall provide information only with respect 
to the total amount of the combined payments for services 
described in paragraph (l)(B)(i) and other services covered 
by the plan. 

(4) No discrimination on basis of provision of abor- 
tion. — No qualified health plan offered through an Exchange 
may discriminate against any individual health care provider 
or health care facility because of its unwillingness to provide, 
pay for, provide coverage of, or refer for abortions 

(c) Application of State and Federal Laws Regarding 
Abortion. — 

(1) no preemption of state laws regarding abor- 
TION. — Nothing in this Act shall be construed to preempt or 
otherwise have any effect on State laws regarding the prohibi- 
tion of (or requirement of) coverage, funding, or procedural re- 
quirements on abortions, including parental notification or con- 
sent for the performance of an abortion on a minor. 

(2) NO EFFECT ON FEDERAL LAWS REGARDING ABORTION. — 

(A) In general. — Nothing in this Act shall be con- 
strued to have any effect on Federal laws regarding — 

(i) conscience protection; 

(ii) willingness or refusal to provide abortion; and 

(iii) discrimination on the basis of the willingness 
or refusal to provide, pay for, cover, or refer for abor- 
tion or to provide or participate in training to provide 
abortion. 

(3) NO EFFECT ON FEDERAL CIVIL RIGHTS LAW. — Nothing in 

this subsection shall alter the rights and obligations of employ- 
ees and employers under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1304 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



68 



(d) Application of Emergency Services Laws. — Nothing in 
this Act shall be construed to relieve any health care provider from 
providing emergency services as required by State or Federal law, 
including section 1867 of the Social Security Act (popularly known 
as "EMTALA"). 

SEC. 1304 [42 U.S.C 18024]. RELATED DEFINITIONS. 

(a) Definitions Relating to Markets. — In this title: 

(1) Group market. — The term "group market" means the 
health insurance market under which individuals obtain 
health insurance coverage (directly or through any arrange- 
ment) on behalf of themselves (and their dependents) through 
a group health plan maintained by an employer. 

(2) Individual market. — The term "individual market" 
means the market for health insurance coverage offered to in- 
dividuals other than in connection with a group health plan. 

(3) Large and small group markets. — The terms "large 
group market" and "small group market" mean the health in- 
surance market under which individuals obtain health insur- 
ance coverage (directly or through any arrangement) on behalf 
of themselves (and their dependents) through a group health 
plan maintained by a large employer (as defined in subsection 

(b) (1)) or by a small employer (as defined in subsection (b)(2)), 
respectively. 

(b) Employers. — In this title: 

(1) Large employer. — The term "large employer" means, 
in connection with a group health plan with respect to a cal- 
endar year and a plan year, an employer who employed an av- 
erage of at least 101 employees on business days during the 
preceding calendar year and who employs at least 1 employee 
on the first day of the plan year. 

(2) Small employer. — The term "small employer" means, 
in connection with a group health plan with respect to a cal- 
endar year and a plan year, an employer who employed an av- 
erage of at least 1 but not more than 100 employees on busi- 
ness days during the preceding calendar year and who employs 
at least 1 employee on the first day of the plan year. 

(3) State option to treat so employees as small. — In 
the case of plan years beginning before January 1, 2016, a 
State may elect to apply this subsection by substituting "51 
employees" for "101 employees" in paragraph (1) and by sub- 
stituting "50 employees" for "100 employees" in paragraph (2). 

(4) Rules for determining employer size. — For pur- 
poses of this subsection — 

(A) Application of aggregation rule for employ- 
ers. — All persons treated as a single employer under sub- 
section (b), (c), (m), or (o) of section 414 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 shall be treated as 1 employer. 

(B) Employers not in existence in preceding 
YEAR. — In the case of an employer which was not in exist- 
ence throughout the preceding calendar year, the deter- 
mination of whether such employer is a small or large em- 
ployer shall be based on the average number of employees 

June 9, 2010 



69 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1311 



that it is reasonably expected such employer will employ 
on business days in the current calendar year. 

(C) Predecessors. — Any reference in this subsection 
to an employer shall include a reference to any predecessor 
of such employer. 

(D) Continuation of participation for growing 

SMALL EMPLOYERS. — If— 

(i) a qualified employer that is a small employer 
makes enrollment in qualified health plans offered in 
the small group market available to its employees 
through an Exchange; and 

(ii) the employer ceases to be a small employer by 
reason of an increase in the number of employees of 
such employer; 

the employer shall continue to be treated as a small em- 
ployer for purposes of this subtitle for the period beginning 
with the increase and ending with the first day on which 
the employer does not make such enrollment available to 
its employees. 

(c) Secretary. — In this title, the term "Secretary" means the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services. 

(d) State. — In this title, the term "State" means each of the 50 
States and the District of Columbia. 

(e) Educated Health Care Consumers. — [As added by sec- 
tion 10104(dJ\ The term "educated health care consumer" means 
an individual who is knowledgeable about the health care system, 
and has background or experience in making informed decisions re- 
garding health, medical, and scientific matters. 

PART 2— CONSUMER CHOICES AND INSUR- 
ANCE COMPETITION THROUGH HEALTH 
BENEFIT EXCHANGES 

SEC. 1311 [42 U.S.C. 13031]. AFFORDABLE CHOICES OF HEALTH BEN- 
EFIT PLANS. 

(a) Assistance to States to Establish American Health 
Benefit Exchanges. — 

(1) Planning and establishment grants. — There shall 
be appropriated to the Secretary, out of any moneys in the 
Treasury not otherwise appropriated, an amount necessary to 
enable the Secretary to make awards, not later than 1 year 
after the date of enactment of this Act, to States in the amount 
specified in paragraph (2) for the uses described in paragraph 
(3). 

(2) Amount specified. — For each fiscal year, the Secretary 
shall determine the total amount that the Secretary will make 
available to each State for grants under this subsection. 

(3) Use of funds. — A State shall use amounts awarded 
under this subsection for activities (including planning activi- 
ties) related to establishing an American Health Benefit Ex- 
change, as described in subsection (b). 

(4) Renewability of grant. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1311 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



70 



(A) In general. — Subject to subsection (d)(4), the Sec- 
retary may renew a grant awarded under paragraph (1) if 
the State recipient of such grant — 

(i) is making progress, as determined by the Sec- 
retary, toward — 

(I) establishing an Exchange; and 

(II) implementing the reforms described in 
subtitles A and C (and the amendments made by 
such subtitles); and 

(ii) is meeting such other benchmarks as the Sec- 
retary may establish. 

(B) Limitation. — No grant shall be awarded under 
this subsection after January 1, 2015. 

(5) Technical assistance to facilitate participation in 
shop exchanges. — The Secretary shall provide technical as- 
sistance to States to facilitate the participation of qualified 
small businesses in such States in SHOP Exchanges. 

(b) American Health Benefit Exchanges. — 

(1) In general. — Each State shall, not later than January 
1, 2014, establish an American Health Benefit Exchange (re- 
ferred to in this title as an "Exchange") for the State that — 

(A) facilitates the purchase of qualified health plans; 

(B) provides for the establishment of a Small Business 
Health Options Program (in this title referred to as a 
"SHOP Exchange") that is designed to assist qualified em- 
ployers in the State who are small employers in facili- 
tating the enrollment of their employees in qualified 
health plans offered in the small group market in the 
State; and 

(C) meets the requirements of subsection (d). 

(2) Merger of individual and shop exchanges. — A State 
may elect to provide only one Exchange in the State for pro- 
viding both Exchange and SHOP Exchange services to both 
qualified individuals and qualified small employers, but only if 
the Exchange has adequate resources to assist such individuals 
and employers. 

(c) Responsibilities of the Secretary. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary shall, by regulation, estab- 
lish criteria for the certification of health plans as qualified 
health plans. Such criteria shall require that, to be certified, 
a plan shall, at a minimum — 

(A) meet marketing requirements, and not employ 
marketing practices or benefit designs that have the effect 
of discouraging the enrollment in such plan by individuals 
with significant health needs; 

(B) ensure a sufficient choice of providers (in a manner 
consistent with applicable network adequacy provisions 
under section 2702(c) of the Public Health Service Act), 
and provide information to enrollees and prospective en- 
rollees on the availability of in-network and out-of-network 
providers; 

(C) include within health insurance plan networks 
those essential community providers, where available, that 
serve predominately low-income, medically-underserved in- 

June 9, 2010 



71 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1311 



dividuals, such as health care providers defined in section 
340B(a)(4) of the Public Health Service Act and providers 
described in section 1927(c)(l)(D)(i)(IV) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act as set forth by section 221 of Public Law 111-8, 
except that nothing in this subparagraph shall be con- 
strued to require any health plan to provide coverage for 
any specific medical procedure; 

(D) (i) be accredited with respect to local performance 
on clinical quality measures such as the Healthcare Effec- 
tiveness Data and Information Set, patient experience rat- 
ings on a standardized Consumer Assessment of 
Healthcare Providers and Systems survey, as well as con- 
sumer access, utilization management, quality assurance, 
provider credentialing, complaints and appeals, network 
adequacy and access, and patient information programs by 
any entity recognized by the Secretary for the accredita- 
tion of health insurance issuers or plans (so long as any 
such entity has transparent and rigorous methodological 
and scoring criteria); or 

(ii) receive such accreditation within a period estab- 
lished by an Exchange for such accreditation that is appli- 
cable to all qualified health plans; 

(E) implement a quality improvement strategy de- 
scribed in subsection (g)(1); 

(F) utilize a uniform enrollment form that qualified in- 
dividuals and qualified employers may use (either elec- 
tronically or on paper) in enrolling in qualified health 
plans offered through such Exchange, and that takes into 
account criteria that the National Association of Insurance 
Commissioners develops and submits to the Secretary; 

(G) utilize the standard format established for pre- 
senting health benefits plan options; 

(H) provide information to enrollees and prospective 
enrollees, and to each Exchange in which the plan is of- 
fered, on any quality measures for health plan perform- 
ance endorsed under section 399JJ of the Public Health 
Service Act, as applicable; and 

(I) report to the Secretary at least annually and in 
such manner as the Secretary shall require, pediatric qual- 
ity reporting measures consistent with the pediatric qual- 
ity reporting measures established under section 1139A of 
the Social Security Act. [As added by section 10203 (a)~\ 

(2) Rule of construction. — Nothing in paragraph (1)(C) 
shall be construed to require a qualified health plan to contract 
with a provider described in such paragraph if such provider 
refuses to accept the generally applicable payment rates of 
such plan. 

(3) Rating system. — The Secretary shall develop a rating 
system that would rate qualified health plans offered through 
an Exchange in each benefits level on the basis of the relative 
quality and price. The Exchange shall include the quality rat- 
ing in the information provided to individuals and employers 
through the Internet portal established under paragraph (4). 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1311 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



72 



(4) Enrollee satisfaction system. — The Secretary shall 
develop an enrollee satisfaction survey system that would 
evaluate the level of enrollee satisfaction with qualified health 
plans offered through an Exchange, for each such qualified 
health plan that had more than 500 enrollees in the previous 
year. The Exchange shall include enrollee satisfaction informa- 
tion in the information provided to individuals and employers 
through the Internet portal established under paragraph (5) in 
a manner that allows individuals to easily compare enrollee 
satisfaction levels between comparable plans. 

(5) Internet portals. — The Secretary shall — 

(A) continue to operate, maintain, and update the 
Internet portal developed under section 1103(a) and to as- 
sist States in developing and maintaining their own such 
portal; and 

(B) make available for use by Exchanges a model tem- 
plate for an Internet portal that may be used to direct 
qualified individuals and qualified employers to qualified 
health plans, to assist such individuals and employers in 
determining whether they are eligible to participate in an 
Exchange or eligible for a premium tax credit or cost-shar- 
ing reduction, and to present standardized information (in- 
cluding quality ratings) regarding qualified health plans 
offered through an Exchange to assist consumers in mak- 
ing easy health insurance choices. 

Such template shall include, with respect to each qualified 
health plan offered through the Exchange in each rating area, 
access to the uniform outline of coverage the plan is required 
to provide under section 2716 of the Public Health Service Act 
and to a copy of the plan's written policy. 

(6) Enrollment periods. — The Secretary shall require an 
Exchange to provide for — 

(A) an initial open enrollment, as determined by the 
Secretary (such determination to be made not later than 
July 1, 2012); 

(B) annual open enrollment periods, as determined by 
the Secretary for calendar years after the initial enroll- 
ment period; 

(C) special enrollment periods specified in section 9801 
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and other special en- 
rollment periods under circumstances similar to such peri- 
ods under part D of title XVIII of the Social Security Act; 
and 

(D) special monthly enrollment periods for Indians (as 
defined in section 4 of the Indian Health Care Improve- 
ment Act). 

(d) Requirements. — 

(1) In general. — An Exchange shall be a governmental 
agency or nonprofit entity that is established by a State. 

(2) Offering of coverage. — 

(A) In general. — An Exchange shall make available 
qualified health plans to qualified individuals and quali- 
fied employers. 

(B) Limitation. — 

June 9, 2010 



73 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1311 



(i) In general. — An Exchange may not make 
available any health plan that is not a qualified health 
plan. 

(ii) Offering of stand-alone dental bene- 
fits. — Each Exchange within a State shall allow an 
issuer of a plan that only provides limited scope dental 
benefits meeting the requirements of section 
9832(c)(2)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to 
offer the plan through the Exchange (either separately 
or in conjunction with a qualified health plan) if the 
plan provides pediatric dental benefits meeting the re- 
quirements of section 1302(b)(l)(J)). 

(3) Rules relating to additional required benefits. — 

(A) In general. — Except as provided in subparagraph 
(B), an Exchange may make available a qualified health 
plan notwithstanding any provision of law that may re- 
quire benefits other than the essential health benefits 
specified under section 1302(b). 

(B) States may require additional benefits. — 

(i) In general. — Subject to the requirements of 
clause (ii), a State may require that a qualified health 
plan offered in such State offer benefits in addition to 
the essential health benefits specified under section 
1302(b). 

(ii) State must assume cost. — [Replaced by sec- 
tion 10104(e)(l)~\ A State shall make payments — 

(I) to an individual enrolled in a qualified 
health plan offered in such State; or 

(II) on behalf of an individual described in 
subclause (I) directly to the qualified health plan 
in which such individual is enrolled; 

to defray the cost of any additional benefits described 
in clause (i). 

(4) Functions. — An Exchange shall, at a minimum — 

(A) implement procedures for the certification, recer- 
tification, and decertification, consistent with guidelines 
developed by the Secretary under subsection (c), of health 
plans as qualified health plans; 

(B) provide for the operation of a toll-free telephone 
hotline to respond to requests for assistance; 

(C) maintain an Internet website through which en- 
rollees and prospective enrollees of qualified health plans 
may obtain standardized comparative information on such 
plans; 

(D) assign a rating to each qualified health plan of- 
fered through such Exchange in accordance with the cri- 
teria developed by the Secretary under subsection (c)(3); 

(E) utilize a standardized format for presenting health 
benefits plan options in the Exchange, including the use of 
the uniform outline of coverage established under section 
2715 of the Public Health Service Act; 

(F) in accordance with section 1413, inform individuals 
of eligibility requirements for the medicaid program under 
title XIX of the Social Security Act, the CHIP program 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1311 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



74 



under title XXI of such Act, or any applicable State or local 
public program and if through screening of the application 
by the Exchange, the Exchange determines that such indi- 
viduals are eligible for any such program, enroll such indi- 
viduals in such program; 

(G) establish and make available by electronic means 
a calculator to determine the actual cost of coverage after 
the application of any premium tax credit under section 
36B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and any cost- 
sharing reduction under section 1402; 

(H) subject to section 1411, grant a certification attest- 
ing that, for purposes of the individual responsibility pen- 
alty under section 5000A of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986, an individual is exempt from the individual require- 
ment or from the penalty imposed by such section be- 
cause — 

(i) there is no affordable qualified health plan 
available through the Exchange, or the individual's 
employer, covering the individual; or 

(ii) the individual meets the requirements for any 
other such exemption from the individual responsi- 
bility requirement or penalty; 

(I) transfer to the Secretary of the Treasury — 

(i) a list of the individuals who are issued a certifi- 
cation under subparagraph (H), including the name 
and taxpayer identification number of each individual; 

(ii) the name and taxpayer identification number 
of each individual who was an employee of an em- 
ployer but who was determined to be eligible for the 
premium tax credit under section 36B of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 because — 

(I) the employer did not provide minimum es- 
sential coverage; or 

(II) the employer provided such minimum es- 
sential coverage but it was determined under sec- 
tion 36B(c)(2)(C) of such Code to either be 
unaffordable to the employee or not provide the 
required minimum actuarial value; and 

(iii) the name and taxpayer identification number 
of each individual who notifies the Exchange under 
section 1411(b)(4) that they have changed employers 
and of each individual who ceases coverage under a 
qualified health plan during a plan year (and the ef- 
fective date of such cessation); 

(J) provide to each employer the name of each em- 
ployee of the employer described in subparagraph (I)(ii) 
who ceases coverage under a qualified health plan during 
a plan year (and the effective date of such cessation); and 

(K) establish the Navigator program described in sub- 
section (i). 

(5) Funding limitations. — 

(a) no federal funds for continued operations. — 
In establishing an Exchange under this section, the State 
shall ensure that such Exchange is self-sustaining begin- 

June 9, 2010 



75 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1311 



ning on January 1, 2015, including allowing the Exchange 
to charge assessments or user fees to participating health 
insurance issuers, or to otherwise generate funding, to 
support its operations. 

(B) Prohibiting wasteful use of funds. — In car- 
rying out activities under this subsection, an Exchange 
shall not utilize any funds intended for the administrative 
and operational expenses of the Exchange for staff re- 
treats, promotional giveaways, excessive executive com- 
pensation, or promotion of Federal or State legislative and 
regulatory modifications. 

(6) Consultation.— An Exchange shall consult with stake- 
holders relevant to carrying out the activities under this sec- 
tion, including — 

(A) [As revised by section 10104(e)(2)~\ educated health 
care consumers who are enrollees in qualified health 
plans; 

(B) individuals and entities with experience in facili- 
tating enrollment in qualified health plans; 

(C) representatives of small businesses and self-em- 
ployed individuals; 

(D) State Medicaid offices; and 

(E) advocates for enrolling hard to reach populations. 

(7) Publication of costs. — An Exchange shall publish 
the average costs of licensing, regulatory fees, and any other 
payments required by the Exchange, and the administrative 
costs of such Exchange, on an Internet website to educate con- 
sumers on such costs. Such information shall also include mon- 
ies lost to waste, fraud, and abuse. 

(e) Certification. — 

(1) In general. — An Exchange may certify a health plan 
as a qualified health plan if — 

(A) such health plan meets the requirements for cer- 
tification as promulgated by the Secretary under sub- 
section (c)(1); and 

(B) the Exchange determines that making available 
such health plan through such Exchange is in the interests 
of qualified individuals and qualified employers in the 
State or States in which such Exchange operates, except 
that the Exchange may not exclude a health plan — 

(i) on the basis that such plan is a fee-for-service 
plan; 

(ii) through the imposition of premium price con- 
trols; or 

(iii) on the basis that the plan provides treatments 
necessary to prevent patients' deaths in circumstances 
the Exchange determines are inappropriate or too 
costly. 

(2) Premium considerations. — [As amended by section 
10104(f)(l)~\ The Exchange shall require health plans seeking 
certification as qualified health plans to submit a justification 
for any premium increase prior to implementation of the in- 
crease. Such plans shall prominently post such information on 
their websites. The Exchange shall take this information, and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1311 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



76 



the information and the recommendations provided to the Ex- 
change by the State under section 2794(b)(1) of the Public 
Health Service Act (relating to patterns or practices of exces- 
sive or unjustified premium increases), into consideration when 
determining whether to make such health plan available 
through the Exchange. The Exchange shall take into account 
any excess of premium growth outside the Exchange as com- 
pared to the rate of such growth inside the Exchange, includ- 
ing information reported by the States. 

(3) Transparency in coverage. — [As added by section 
10104(f)(2)! 

(A) In general. — The Exchange shall require health 
plans seeking certification as qualified health plans to sub- 
mit to the Exchange, the Secretary, the State insurance 
commissioner, and make available to the public, accurate 
and timely disclosure of the following information: 

(i) Claims payment policies and practices. 

(ii) Periodic financial disclosures, 
(hi) Data on enrollment. 

(iv) Data on disenrollment. 

(v) Data on the number of claims that are denied. 

(vi) Data on rating practices. 

(vii) Information on cost-sharing and payments 
with respect to any out-of-network coverage. 

(viii) Information on enrollee and participant 
rights under this title. 

(ix) Other information as determined appropriate 
by the Secretary. 

(B) Use of plain language. — The information re- 
quired to be submitted under subparagraph (A) shall be 
provided in plain language. The term "plain language" 
means language that the intended audience, including in- 
dividuals with limited English proficiency, can readily un- 
derstand and use because that language is concise, well-or- 
ganized, and follows other best practices of plain language 
writing. The Secretary and the Secretary of Labor shall 
jointly develop and issue guidance on best practices of 
plain language writing. 

(C) Cost sharing transparency. — The Exchange 
shall require health plans seeking certification as qualified 
health plans to permit individuals to learn the amount of 
cost-sharing (including deductibles, copayments, and coin- 
surance) under the individual's plan or coverage that the 
individual would be responsible for paying with respect to 
the furnishing of a specific item or service by a partici- 
pating provider in a timely manner upon the request of the 
individual. At a minimum, such information shall be made 
available to such individual through an Internet website 
and such other means for individuals without access to the 
Internet. 

(D) Group health plans. — The Secretary of Labor 
shall update and harmonize the Secretary's rules con- 
cerning the accurate and timely disclosure to participants 
by group health plans of plan disclosure, plan terms and 

June 9, 2010 



77 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1311 



conditions, and periodic financial disclosure with the 
standards established by the Secretary under subpara- 
graph (A). 

(f) Flexibility. — 

(1) Regional or other interstate exchanges. — An Ex- 
change may operate in more than one State if — 

(A) each State in which such Exchange operates per- 
mits such operation; and 

(B) the Secretary approves such regional or interstate 
Exchange. 

(2) Subsidiary exchanges. — A State may establish one or 
more subsidiary Exchanges if — 

(A) each such Exchange serves a geographically dis- 
tinct area; and 

(B) the area served by each such Exchange is at least 
as large as a rating area described in section 2701(a) of the 
Public Health Service Act. 

(3) Authority to contract. — 

(A) In general. — A State may elect to authorize an 
Exchange established by the State under this section to 
enter into an agreement with an eligible entity to carry 
out 1 or more responsibilities of the Exchange. 

(B) Eligible entity. — In this paragraph, the term "el- 
igible entity" means — 

(i) a person — 

(I) incorporated under, and subject to the laws 
of, 1 or more States; 

(II) that has demonstrated experience on a 
State or regional basis in the individual and small 
group health insurance markets and in benefits 
coverage; and 

(III) that is not a health insurance issuer or 
that is treated under subsection (a) or (b) of sec- 
tion 52 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as 
a member of the same controlled group of corpora- 
tions (or under common control with) as a health 
insurance issuer; or 

(ii) the State medicaid agency under title XIX of 
the Social Security Act. 

(g) Rewarding Quality Through Market-Based Incen- 
tives. — 

(1) Strategy described. — A strategy described in this 
paragraph is a payment structure that provides increased re- 
imbursement or other incentives for — 

(A) improving health outcomes through the implemen- 
tation of activities that shall include quality reporting, ef- 
fective case management, care coordination, chronic dis- 
ease management, medication and care compliance initia- 
tives, including through the use of the medical home 
model, for treatment or services under the plan or cov- 
erage; 

(B) the implementation of activities to prevent hospital 
readmissions through a comprehensive program for hos- 
pital discharge that includes patient-centered education 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1311 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



78 



and counseling, comprehensive discharge planning, and 
post discharge reinforcement by an appropriate health care 
professional; 

(C) the implementation of activities to improve patient 
safety and reduce medical errors through the appropriate 
use of best clinical practices, evidence based medicine, and 
health information technology under the plan or coverage; 

(D) the implementation of wellness and health pro- 
motion activities; and 

(E) [As added by section 10104(gj\ the implementa- 
tion of activities to reduce health and health care dispari- 
ties, including through the use of language services, com- 
munity outreach, and cultural competency trainings. 

(2) Guidelines. — The Secretary, in consultation with ex- 
perts in health care quality and stakeholders, shall develop 
guidelines concerning the matters described in paragraph (1). 

(3) Requirements. — The guidelines developed under para- 
graph (2) shall require the periodic reporting to the applicable 
Exchange of the activities that a qualified health plan has con- 
ducted to implement a strategy described in paragraph (1). 

(h) Quality Improvement. — 

(1) Enhancing patient safety. — Beginning on January 1, 
2015, a qualified health plan may contract with — 

(A) a hospital with greater than 50 beds only if such 
hospital — 

(i) utilizes a patient safety evaluation system as 
described in part C of title IX of the Public Health 
Service Act; and 

(ii) implements a mechanism to ensure that each 
patient receives a comprehensive program for hospital 
discharge that includes patient-centered education and 
counseling, comprehensive discharge planning, and 
post discharge reinforcement by an appropriate health 
care professional; or 

(B) a health care provider only if such provider imple- 
ments such mechanisms to improve health care quality as 
the Secretary may by regulation require. 

(2) Exceptions. — The Secretary may establish reasonable 
exceptions to the requirements described in paragraph (1). 

(3) Adjustment. — The Secretary may by regulation adjust 
the number of beds described in paragraph (1)(A). 

(i) Navigators — 

(1) In general. — An Exchange shall establish a program 
under which it awards grants to entities described in para- 
graph (2) to carry out the duties described in paragraph (3). 

(2) Eligibility. — 

(A) In general. — To be eligible to receive a grant 
under paragraph (1), an entity shall demonstrate to the 
Exchange involved that the entity has existing relation- 
ships, or could readily establish relationships, with em- 
ployers and employees, consumers (including uninsured 
and underinsured consumers), or self-employed individuals 
likely to be qualified to enroll in a qualified health plan. 

June 9, 2010 



79 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1311 



(B) Types. — [As amended by section 10104(h)~\ Enti- 
ties described in subparagraph (A) may include trade, in- 
dustry, and professional associations, commercial fishing 
industry organizations, ranching and farming organiza- 
tions, community and consumer-focused nonprofit groups, 
chambers of commerce, unions, resource partners of the 
Small Business Administration, other licensed insurance 
agents and brokers, and other entities that — 

(i) are capable of carrying out the duties described 
in paragraph (3); 

(ii) meet the standards described in paragraph (4); 

and 

(iii) provide information consistent with the stand- 
ards developed under paragraph (5). 

(3) Duties. — An entity that serves as a navigator under a 
grant under this subsection shall — 

(A) conduct public education activities to raise aware- 
ness of the availability of qualified health plans; 

(B) distribute fair and impartial information con- 
cerning enrollment in qualified health plans, and the 
availability of premium tax credits under section 36B of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and cost-sharing reduc- 
tions under section 1402; 

(C) facilitate enrollment in qualified health plans; 

(D) provide referrals to any applicable office of health 
insurance consumer assistance or health insurance om- 
budsman established under section 2793 of the Public 
Health Service Act, or any other appropriate State agency 
or agencies, for any enrollee with a grievance, complaint, 
or question regarding their health plan, coverage, or a de- 
termination under such plan or coverage; and 

(E) provide information in a manner that is culturally 
and linguistically appropriate to the needs of the popu- 
lation being served by the Exchange or Exchanges. 

(4) Standards. — 

(A) In general. — The Secretary shall establish stand- 
ards for navigators under this subsection, including provi- 
sions to ensure that any private or public entity that is se- 
lected as a navigator is qualified, and licensed if appro- 
priate, to engage in the navigator activities described in 
this subsection and to avoid conflicts of interest. Under 
such standards, a navigator shall not — 

(i) be a health insurance issuer; or 

(ii) receive any consideration directly or indirectly 
from any health insurance issuer in connection with 
the enrollment of any qualified individuals or employ- 
ees of a qualified employer in a qualified health plan. 

(5) Fair and impartial information and services. — The 
Secretary, in collaboration with States, shall develop standards 
to ensure that information made available by navigators is 
fair, accurate, and impartial. 

(6) Funding. — Grants under this subsection shall be made 
from the operational funds of the Exchange and not Federal 
funds received by the State to establish the Exchange. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1312 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



80 



(j) Applicability of Mental Health Parity. — Section 2726 of 
the Public Health Service Act shall apply to qualified health plans 
in the same manner and to the same extent as such section applies 
to health insurance issuers and group health plans. 

(k) Conflict. — An Exchange may not establish rules that con- 
flict with or prevent the application of regulations promulgated by 
the Secretary under this subtitle. 

SEC. 1312 [42 U.S.C. 18032]. CONSUMER CHOICE. 

(a) Choice. — 

(1) Qualified individuals. — [As revised by section 
10104(i)(l)~\ A qualified individual may enroll in any qualified 
health plan available to such individual and for which such in- 
dividual is eligible. 

(2) Qualified employers. — 

(A) Employer may specify level. — A qualified em- 
ployer may provide support for coverage of employees 
under a qualified health plan by selecting any level of cov- 
erage under section 1302(d) to be made available to em- 
ployees through an Exchange. 

(B) Employee may choose plans within a level. — 
Each employee of a qualified employer that elects a level 
of coverage under subparagraph (A) may choose to enroll 
in a qualified health plan that offers coverage at that level. 

(b) Payment of Premiums by Qualified Individuals. — A 
qualified individual enrolled in any qualified health plan may pay 
any applicable premium owed by such individual to the health in- 
surance issuer issuing such qualified health plan. 

(c) Single Risk Pool. — 

(1) Individual market. — A health insurance issuer shall 
consider all enrollees in all health plans (other than grand- 
fathered health plans) offered by such issuer in the individual 
market, including those enrollees who do not enroll in such 
plans through the Exchange, to be members of a single risk 
pool. 

(2) Small group market. — A health insurance issuer 
shall consider all enrollees in all health plans (other than 
grandfathered health plans) offered by such issuer in the small 
group market, including those enrollees who do not enroll in 
such plans through the Exchange, to be members of a single 
risk pool. 

(3) Merger of markets. — A State may require the indi- 
vidual and small group insurance markets within a State to be 
merged if the State determines appropriate. 

(4) State law. — A State law requiring grandfathered 
health plans to be included in a pool described in paragraph 
(1) or (2) shall not apply. 

(d) Empowering Consumer Choice. — 

(1) Continued operation of market outside ex- 
changes. — Nothing in this title shall be construed to pro- 
hibit— 

(A) a health insurance issuer from offering outside of 
an Exchange a health plan to a qualified individual or 
qualified employer; and 

June 9, 2010 



81 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1312 



(B) a qualified individual from enrolling in, or a quali- 
fied employer from selecting for its employees, a health 
plan offered outside of an Exchange. 

(2) Continued operation of state benefit require- 
ments. — Nothing in this title shall be construed to terminate, 
abridge, or limit the operation of any requirement under State 
law with respect to any policy or plan that is offered outside 
of an Exchange to offer benefits. 

(3) Voluntary nature of an exchange. — 

(A) Choice to enroll or not to enroll. — Nothing 
in this title shall be construed to restrict the choice of a 
qualified individual to enroll or not to enroll in a qualified 
health plan or to participate in an Exchange. 

(B) Prohibition against compelled enrollment. — 
Nothing in this title shall be construed to compel an indi- 
vidual to enroll in a qualified health plan or to participate 
in an Exchange. 

(C) INDD7IDUALS ALLOWED TO ENROLL IN ANY PLAN. — 
A qualified individual may enroll in any qualified health 
plan, except that in the case of a catastrophic plan de- 
scribed in section 1302(e), a qualified individual may enroll 
in the plan only if the individual is eligible to enroll in the 
plan under section 1302(e)(2). 

(D) Members of congress in the exchange. — 

(i) Requirement. — Notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, after the effective date of this sub- 
title, the only health plans that the Federal Govern- 
ment may make available to Members of Congress and 
congressional staff with respect to their service as a 
Member of Congress or congressional staff shall be 
health plans that are — 

(I) created under this Act (or an amendment 
made by this Act); or 

(II) offered through an Exchange established 
under this Act (or an amendment made by this 
Act). 

(ii) Definitions. — In this section: 

(I) Member of congress. — The term "Mem- 
ber of Congress" means any member of the House 
of Representatives or the Senate. 

(II) Congressional staff. — The term "con- 
gressional staff means all full-time and part-time 
employees employed by the official office of a 
Member of Congress, whether in Washington, DC 
or outside of Washington, DC. 

(4) NO PENALTY FOR TRANSFERRING TO MINIMUM ESSENTIAL 

coverage outside exchange. — An Exchange, or a qualified 
health plan offered through an Exchange, shall not impose any 
penalty or other fee on an individual who cancels enrollment 
in a plan because the individual becomes eligible for minimum 
essential coverage (as defined in section 5000A(f) of the Inter- 
nal Revenue Code of 1986 without regard to paragraph (1)(C) 
or (D) thereof) or such coverage becomes affordable (within the 
meaning of section 36B(c)(2)(C) of such Code). 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1312 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



82 



(e) Enrollment Through Agents or Brokers. — [As revised 
by section 10104(i)(2)~\ The Secretary shall establish procedures 
under which a State may allow agents or brokers — 

(1) to enroll individuals and employers in any qualified 
health plans in the individual or small group market as soon 
as the plan is offered through an Exchange in the State; and 

(2) to assist individuals in applying for premium tax cred- 
its and cost-sharing reductions for plans sold through an Ex- 
change. 

(f) Qualified Individuals and Employers; Access Limited 
to Citizens and Lawful Residents. — 

(1) Qualified individuals. — In this title: 

(A) In general. — The term "qualified individual" 
means, with respect to an Exchange, an individual who — 

(i) is seeking to enroll in a qualified health plan 
in the individual market offered through the Ex- 
change; and 

(ii) [As revised by section 10104(i)(3)~\ resides in 
the State that established the Exchange. 

(B) Incarcerated individuals excluded. — An indi- 
vidual shall not be treated as a qualified individual if, at 
the time of enrollment, the individual is incarcerated, 
other than incarceration pending the disposition of 
charges. 

(2) Qualified employer. — In this title: 

(A) In general. — The term "qualified employer" 
means a small employer that elects to make all full-time 
employees of such employer eligible for 1 or more qualified 
health plans offered in the small group market through an 
Exchange that offers qualified health plans. 

(B) Extension to large groups. — 

(i) In general. — Beginning in 2017, each State 
may allow issuers of health insurance coverage in the 
large group market in the State to offer qualified 
health plans in such market through an Exchange. 
Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed as re- 
quiring the issuer to offer such plans through an Ex- 
change. 

(ii) Large employers eligible. — If a State under 
clause (i) allows issuers to offer qualified health plans 
in the large group market through an Exchange, the 
term "qualified employer" shall include a large em- 
ployer that elects to make all full-time employees of 
such employer eligible for 1 or more qualified health 
plans offered in the large group market through the 
Exchange. 

(3) Access limited to lawful residents. — If an indi- 
vidual is not, or is not reasonably expected to be for the entire 
period for which enrollment is sought, a citizen or national of 
the United States or an alien lawfully present in the United 
States, the individual shall not be treated as a qualified indi- 
vidual and may not be covered under a qualified health plan 
in the individual market that is offered through an Exchange. 

June 9, 2010 



83 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1313 



SEC. 1313 [42 U.S.C. 18033]. FINANCIAL INTEGRITY. 

(a) Accounting for Expenditures. — 

(1) In General. — An Exchange shall keep an accurate ac- 
counting of all activities, receipts, and expenditures and shall 
annually submit to the Secretary a report concerning such ac- 
countings. 

(2) Investigations. — The Secretary, in coordination with 
the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human 
Services, may investigate the affairs of an Exchange, may ex- 
amine the properties and records of an Exchange, and may re- 
quire periodic reports in relation to activities undertaken by an 
Exchange. An Exchange shall fully cooperate in any investiga- 
tion conducted under this paragraph. 

(3) Audits. — An Exchange shall be subject to annual au- 
dits by the Secretary. 

(4) Pattern of Abuse. — If the Secretary determines that 
an Exchange or a State has engaged in serious misconduct 
with respect to compliance with the requirements of, or car- 
rying out of activities required under, this title, the Secretary 
may rescind from payments otherwise due to such State in- 
volved under this or any other Act administered by the Sec- 
retary an amount not to exceed 1 percent of such payments per 
year until corrective actions are taken by the State that are de- 
termined to be adequate by the Secretary. 

(5) Protections Against Fraud and Abuse. — With re- 
spect to activities carried out under this title, the Secretary 
shall provide for the efficient and non-discriminatory adminis- 
tration of Exchange activities and implement any measure or 
procedure that — 

(A) the Secretary determines is appropriate to reduce 
fraud and abuse in the administration of this title; and 

(B) the Secretary has authority to implement under 
this title or any other Act. 

(6) Application of the False Claims Act. — 

(A) In general. — Payments made by, through, or in 
connection with an Exchange are subject to the False 
Claims Act (31 U.S.C. 3729 et seq.) if those payments in- 
clude any Federal funds. Compliance with the require- 
ments of this Act concerning eligibility for a health insur- 
ance issuer to participate in the Exchange shall be a mate- 
rial condition of an issuer's entitlement to receive pay- 
ments, including payments of premium tax credits and 
cost-sharing reductions, through the Exchange. 
[Section 10104(j)(l), p. 834, provides that subparagraph (B) is 
deemed "null, void, and of no effect"] 

[(B) Damages. — Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of sec- 
tion 3729(a) of title 31, United States Code, and subject to 
paragraph (2) of such section, the civil penalty assessed 
under the False Claims Act on any person found liable 
under such Act as described in subparagraph (A) shall be 
increased by not less than 3 times and not more than 6 
times the amount of damages which the Government sus- 
tains because of the act of that person.] 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1313 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



84 



[Section 10104(j)(2),p. 834, replaced paragraph (4) of section 
3730(e) of title 31, United States Code, as follows:] 

(2) [sec. 10104(j)(2) of PPACA:] Section 3730(e) of title 31, 
United States Code, is amended by striking paragraph (4) and in- 
serting the following: 

"(4)(A) The court shall dismiss an action or claim under 
this section, unless opposed by the Government, if substan- 
tially the same allegations or transactions as alleged in the ac- 
tion or claim were publicly disclosed — 

"(i) in a Federal criminal, civil, or administrative hear- 
ing in which the Government or its agent is a party; 

"(ii) in a congressional, Government Accountability Of- 
fice, or other Federal report, hearing, audit, or investiga- 
tion; or 

"(hi) from the news media, 
unless the action is brought by the Attorney General or the 
person bringing the action is an original source of the informa- 
tion. 

"(B) For purposes of this paragraph, "original source" 
means an individual who either (i) prior to a public disclosure 
under subsection (e)(4)(a), has voluntarily disclosed to the Gov- 
ernment the information on which allegations or transactions 
in a claim are based, or (2) who has knowledge that is inde- 
pendent of and materially adds to the publicly disclosed allega- 
tions or transactions, and who has voluntarily provided the in- 
formation to the Government before filing an action under this 
section.". 

(b) GAO Oversight. — Not later than 5 years after the first 
date on which Exchanges are required to be operational under this 
title, the Comptroller General shall conduct an ongoing study of 
Exchange activities and the enrollees in qualified health plans of- 
fered through Exchanges. Such study shall review — 

(1) the operations and administration of Exchanges, in- 
cluding surveys and reports of qualified health plans offered 
through Exchanges and on the experience of such plans (in- 
cluding data on enrollees in Exchanges and individuals pur- 
chasing health insurance coverage outside of Exchanges), the 
expenses of Exchanges, claims statistics relating to qualified 
health plans, complaints data relating to such plans, and the 
manner in which Exchanges meet their goals; 

(2) any significant observations regarding the utilization 
and adoption of Exchanges; 

(3) where appropriate, recommendations for improvements 
in the operations or policies of Exchanges; 

(4) [As added by section 10104(k)(3)j a survey of the cost 
and affordability of health care insurance provided under the 
Exchanges for owners and employees of small business con- 
cerns (as defined under section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 
U.S.C. 632)), including data on enrollees in Exchanges and in- 
dividuals purchasing health insurance coverage outside of Ex- 
changes; and 

(5) how many physicians, by area and specialty, are not 
taking or accepting new patients enrolled in Federal Govern- 

June 9, 2010 



85 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1321 



ment health care programs, and the adequacy of provider net- 
works of Federal Government health care programs. 

PART 3— STATE FLEXIBILITY RELATING TO 
EXCHANGES 

SEC. 1321 [42 U.S.C. 18041]. STATE FLEXIBILITY IN OPERATION AND 
ENFORCEMENT OF EXCHANGES AND RELATED REQUIRE- 
MENTS. 

(a) Establishment of Standards. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary shall, as soon as prac- 
ticable after the date of enactment of this Act, issue regula- 
tions setting standards for meeting the requirements under 
this title, and the amendments made by this title, with respect 
to— 

(A) the establishment and operation of Exchanges (in- 
cluding SHOP Exchanges); 

(B) the offering of qualified health plans through such 
Exchanges; 

(C) the establishment of the reinsurance and risk ad- 
justment programs under part V; and 

(D) such other requirements as the Secretary deter- 
mines appropriate. 

The preceding sentence shall not apply to standards for re- 
quirements under subtitles A and C (and the amendments 
made by such subtitles) for which the Secretary issues regula- 
tions under the Public Health Service Act. 

(2) Consultation. — In issuing the regulations under para- 
graph (1), the Secretary shall consult with the National Asso- 
ciation of Insurance Commissioners and its members and with 
health insurance issuers, consumer organizations, and such 
other individuals as the Secretary selects in a manner de- 
signed to ensure balanced representation among interested 
parties. 

(b) State Action. — Each State that elects, at such time and in 
such manner as the Secretary may prescribe, to apply the require- 
ments described in subsection (a) shall, not later than January 1, 
2014, adopt and have in effect — 

(1) the Federal standards established under subsection (a); 

or 

(2) a State law or regulation that the Secretary determines 
implements the standards within the State. 

(c) Failure To Establish Exchange or Implement Require- 
ments. — 

(1) IN GENERAL. — If— 

(A) a State is not an electing State under subsection 
(b); or 

(B) the Secretary determines, on or before January 1, 
2013, that an electing State — 

(i) will not have any required Exchange oper- 
ational by January 1, 2014; or 

(ii) has not taken the actions the Secretary deter- 
mines necessary to implement — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1322 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



86 



(I) the other requirements set forth in the 
standards under subsection (a); or 

(II) the requirements set forth in subtitles A 
and C and the amendments made by such sub- 
titles; 

the Secretary shall (directly or through agreement with a not- 
for-profit entity) establish and operate such Exchange within 
the State and the Secretary shall take such actions as are nec- 
essary to implement such other requirements. 

(2) Enforcement authority. — The provisions of section 
2736(b) of the Public Health Services Act shall apply to the en- 
forcement under paragraph (1) of requirements of subsection 
(a)(1) (without regard to any limitation on the application of 
those provisions to group health plans). 

(d) No Interference With State Regulatory Authority. — 
Nothing in this title shall be construed to preempt any State law 
that does not prevent the application of the provisions of this title. 

(e) Presumption for Certain State-Operated Exchanges. — 

(1) In general. — In the case of a State operating an Ex- 
change before January 1, 2010, and which has insured a per- 
centage of its population not less than the percentage of the 
population projected to be covered nationally after the imple- 
mentation of this Act, that seeks to operate an Exchange under 
this section, the Secretary shall presume that such Exchange 
meets the standards under this section unless the Secretary 
determines, after completion of the process established under 
paragraph (2), that the Exchange does not comply with such 
standards. 

(2) Process. — The Secretary shall establish a process to 
work with a State described in paragraph (1) to provide assist- 
ance necessary to assist the State's Exchange in coming into 
compliance with the standards for approval under this section. 

SEC. 1322 [42 U.S.C. 18042]. FEDERAL PROGRAM TO ASSIST ESTABLISH- 
MENT AND OPERATION OF NONPROFIT, MEMBER-RUN 
HEALTH INSURANCE ISSUERS. 

(a) Establishment of Program. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary shall establish a program 
to carry out the purposes of this section to be known as the 
Consumer Operated and Oriented Plan (CO-OP) program. 

(2) Purpose. — It is the purpose of the CO-OP program to 
foster the creation of qualified nonprofit health insurance 
issuers to offer qualified health plans in the individual and 
small group markets in the States in which the issuers are li- 
censed to offer such plans. 

(b) Loans and Grants Under the CO-OP Program. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary shall provide through the 
CO-OP program for the awarding to persons applying to be- 
come qualified nonprofit health insurance issuers of — 

(A) loans to provide assistance to such person in meet- 
ing its start-up costs; and 

(B) grants to provide assistance to such person in 
meeting any solvency requirements of States in which the 
person seeks to be licensed to issue qualified health plans. 

(2) Requirements for awarding loans and grants. — 

June 9, 2010 



87 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1322 



(A) In general. — In awarding loans and grants under 
the CO-OP program, the Secretary shall — 

(i) take into account the recommendations of the 
advisory board established under paragraph (3); 

(ii) give priority to applicants that will offer quali- 
fied health plans on a Statewide basis, will utilize in- 
tegrated care models, and have significant private sup- 
port; and 

(iii) ensure that there is sufficient funding to es- 
tablish at least 1 qualified nonprofit health insurance 
issuer in each State, except that nothing in this clause 
shall prohibit the Secretary from funding the estab- 
lishment of multiple qualified nonprofit health insur- 
ance issuers in any State if the funding is sufficient to 
do so. 

(B) States without issuers in program. — If no 
health insurance issuer applies to be a qualified nonprofit 
health insurance issuer within a State, the Secretary may 
use amounts appropriated under this section for the 
awarding of grants to encourage the establishment of a 
qualified nonprofit health insurance issuer within the 
State or the expansion of a qualified nonprofit health in- 
surance issuer from another State to the State. 

(C) Agreement. — 

(i) In general. — The Secretary shall require any 
person receiving a loan or grant under the CO-OP pro- 
gram to enter into an agreement with the Secretary 
which requires such person to meet (and to continue 
to meet) — 

(I) any requirement under this section for 
such person to be treated as a qualified nonprofit 
health insurance issuer; and 

(II) any requirements contained in the agree- 
ment for such person to receive such loan or 
grant. 

(ii) Restrictions on use of federal funds. — 
The agreement shall include a requirement that no 
portion of the funds made available by any loan or 
grant under this section may be used — 

(I) for carrying on propaganda, or otherwise 
attempting, to influence legislation; or 

(II) for marketing. 

Nothing in this clause shall be construed to allow a 
person to take any action prohibited by section 
501(c)(29) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. 

(iii) Failure to meet requirements. — If the Sec- 
retary determines that a person has failed to meet any 
requirement described in clause (i) or (ii) and has 
failed to correct such failure within a reasonable pe- 
riod of time of when the person first knows (or reason- 
ably should have known) of such failure, such person 
shall repay to the Secretary an amount equal to the 
sum of — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1322 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



88 



(I) 110 percent of the aggregate amount of 
loans and grants received under this section; plus 

(II) interest on the aggregate amount of loans 
and grants received under this section for the pe- 
riod the loans or grants were outstanding. 

The Secretary shall notify the Secretary of the Treas- 
ury of any determination under this section of a fail- 
ure that results in the termination of an issuer's tax- 
exempt status under section 501(c)(29) of such Code. 
(D) Time for awarding loans and grants. — The Sec- 
retary shall not later than July 1, 2013, award the loans 
and grants under the CO-OP program and begin the dis- 
tribution of amounts awarded under such loans and 
grants. 

(3) Repayment of loans and grants. — [As added by sec- 
tion 10104(1X2)1 Not later than July 1, 2013, and prior to 
awarding loans and grants under the CO-OP program, the Sec- 
retary shall promulgate regulations with respect to the repay- 
ment of such loans and grants in a manner that is consistent 
with State solvency regulations and other similar State laws 
that may apply. In promulgating such regulations, the Sec- 
retary shall provide that such loans shall be repaid within 5 
years and such grants shall be repaid within 15 years, taking 
into consideration any appropriate State reserve requirements, 
solvency regulations, and requisite surplus note arrangements 
that must be constructed in a State to provide for such repay- 
ment prior to awarding such loans and grants. 

(4) Advisory board. — [As redesignated by section 
10104(l)(l)~\ 

(A) In general. — The advisory board under this para- 
graph shall consist of 15 members appointed by the Comp- 
troller General of the United States from among individ- 
uals with qualifications described in section 1805(c)(2) of 
the Social Security Act. 

(B) Rules relating to appointments. — 

(i) Standards. — Any individual appointed under 
subparagraph (A) shall meet ethics and conflict of in- 
terest standards protecting against insurance industry 
involvement and interference. 

(ii) Original appointments. — The original ap- 
pointment of board members under subparagraph 
(A)(ii) shall be made no later than 3 months after the 
date of enactment of this Act. 

(C) Vacancy. — Any vacancy on the advisory board 
shall be filled in the same manner as the original appoint- 
ment. 

(D) Pay and reimbursement. — 

(i) NO COMPENSATION FOR MEMBERS OF ADVISORY 

board. — Except as provided in clause (ii), a member of 
the advisory board may not receive pay, allowances, or 
benefits by reason of their service on the board. 

(ii) Travel expenses. — Each member shall re- 
ceive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of 

June 9, 2010 



89 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1322 



subsistence under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, 
United States Code. 

(E) Application of faca. — The Federal Advisory 
Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.) shall apply to the advisory 
board, except that section 14 of such Act shall not apply. 

(F) Termination. — The advisory board shall terminate 
on the earlier of the date that it completes its duties under 
this section or December 31, 2015. 

(c) Qualified Nonprofit Health Insurance Issuer. — For 
purposes of this section — 

(1) In general. — The term "qualified nonprofit health in- 
surance issuer" means a health insurance issuer that is an or- 
ganization — 

(A) that is organized under State law as a nonprofit, 
member corporation; 

(B) substantially all of the activities of which consist 
of the issuance of qualified health plans in the individual 
and small group markets in each State in which it is li- 
censed to issue such plans; and 

(C) that meets the other requirements of this sub- 
section. 

(2) Certain organizations prohibited. — An organization 
shall not be treated as a qualified nonprofit health insurance 
issuer if — 

(A) the organization or a related entity (or any prede- 
cessor of either) was a health insurance issuer on July 16, 
2009; or 

(B) the organization is sponsored by a State or local 
government, any political subdivision thereof, or any in- 
strumentality of such government or political subdivision. 

(3) Governance requirements. — An organization shall 
not be treated as a qualified nonprofit health insurance issuer 
unless — 

(A) the governance of the organization is subject to a 
majority vote of its members; 

(B) its governing documents incorporate ethics and 
conflict of interest standards protecting against insurance 
industry involvement and interference; and 

(C) as provided in regulations promulgated by the Sec- 
retary, the organization is required to operate with a 
strong consumer focus, including timeliness, responsive- 
ness, and accountability to members. 

(4) Profits inure to benefit of members. — An organiza- 
tion shall not be treated as a qualified nonprofit health insur- 
ance issuer unless any profits made by the organization are re- 
quired to be used to lower premiums, to improve benefits, or 
for other programs intended to improve the quality of health 
care delivered to its members. 

(5) Compliance with state insurance laws. — An organi- 
zation shall not be treated as a qualified nonprofit health in- 
surance issuer unless the organization meets all the require- 
ments that other issuers of qualified health plans are required 
to meet in any State where the issuer offers a qualified health 
plan, including solvency and licensure requirements, rules on 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1322 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



90 



payments to providers, and compliance with network adequacy 
rules, rate and form filing rules, any applicable State premium 
assessments and any other State law described in section 
1324(b). 

(6) Coordination with state insurance reforms. — An 
organization shall not be treated as a qualified nonprofit 
health insurance issuer unless the organization does not offer 
a health plan in a State until that State has in effect (or the 
Secretary has implemented for the State) the market reforms 
required by part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service 
Act (as amended by subtitles A and C of this Act). 

(d) Establishment of Private Purchasing Council. — 

(1) In general. — Qualified nonprofit health insurance 
issuers participating in the CO-OP program under this section 
may establish a private purchasing council to enter into collec- 
tive purchasing arrangements for items and services that in- 
crease administrative and other cost efficiencies, including 
claims administration, administrative services, health informa- 
tion technology, and actuarial services. 

(2) Council may not set payment rates. — The private 
purchasing council established under paragraph (1) shall not 
set payment rates for health care facilities or providers partici- 
pating in health insurance coverage provided by qualified non- 
profit health insurance issuers. 

(3) Continued application of antitrust laws. — 

(A) In general. — Nothing in this section shall be con- 
strued to limit the application of the antitrust laws to any 
private purchasing council (whether or not established 
under this subsection) or to any qualified nonprofit health 
insurance issuer participating in such a council. 

(B) Antitrust laws. — For purposes of this subpara- 
graph, the term "antitrust laws" has the meaning given 
the term in subsection (a) of the first section of the Clay- 
ton Act (15 U.S.C. 12(a)). Such term also includes section 
5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45) to 
the extent that such section 5 applies to unfair methods of 
competition. 

(e) Limitation on Participation. — No representative of any 
Federal, State, or local government (or of any political subdivision 
or instrumentality thereof), and no representative of a person de- 
scribed in subsection (c)(2)(A), may serve on the board of directors 
of a qualified nonprofit health insurance issuer or with a private 
purchasing council established under subsection (d). 

(f) Limitations on Secretary. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary shall not — 

(A) participate in any negotiations between 1 or more 
qualified nonprofit health insurance issuers (or a private 
purchasing council established under subsection (d)) and 
any health care facilities or providers, including any drug 
manufacturer, pharmacy, or hospital; and 

(B) establish or maintain a price structure for reim- 
bursement of any health benefits covered by such issuers. 

(2) Competition. — Nothing in this section shall be con- 
strued as authorizing the Secretary to interfere with the corn- 
June 9, 2010 



91 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1322 



petitive nature of providing health benefits through qualified 
nonprofit health insurance issuers. 

(g) Appropriations. — There are hereby appropriated, out of 
any funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, 
$6,000,000,000 to carry out this section. 

(h) Tax Exemption for Qualified Nonprofit Health Insur- 
ance Issuer. — 

(1) In general. — Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 (relating to list of exempt organizations) is 
amended by adding at the end the following: 

"(29) CO-OP health insurance issuers. — 

"(A) In general. — A qualified nonprofit health insur- 
ance issuer (within the meaning of section 1322 of the Pa- 
tient Protection and Affordable Care Act) which has re- 
ceived a loan or grant under the CO-OP program under 
such section, but only with respect to periods for which the 
issuer is in compliance with the requirements of such sec- 
tion and any agreement with respect to the loan or grant. 

"(B) Conditions for exemption. — Subparagraph (A) 
shall apply to an organization only if — 

"(i) the organization has given notice to the Sec- 
retary, in such manner as the Secretary may by regu- 
lations prescribe, that it is applying for recognition of 
its status under this paragraph, 

"(ii) except as provided in section 1322(c)(4) of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, no part of 
the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any 
private shareholder or individual, 

"(hi) no substantial part of the activities of which 
is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting, to 
influence legislation, and 

"(iv) the organization does not participate in, or 
intervene in (including the publishing or distributing 
of statements), any political campaign on behalf of (or 
in opposition to) any candidate for public office.". 

(2) Additional reporting requirement. — Section 6033 of 
such Code (relating to returns by exempt organizations) is 
amended by redesignating subsection (m) as subsection (n) and 
by inserting after subsection (1) the following: 

"(m) Additional Information Required From CO-OP Insur- 
ers. — An organization described in section 501(c)(29) shall include 
on the return required under subsection (a) the following informa- 
tion: 

"(1) The amount of the reserves required by each State in 
which the organization is licensed to issue qualified health 
plans. 

"(2) The amount of reserves on hand.". 

(3) Application of tax on excess benefit trans- 
actions. — Section 4958(e)(1) of such Code (defining applicable 
tax-exempt organization) is amended by striking "paragraph 
(3) or (4)" and inserting "paragraph (3), (4), or (29)". 

(i) GAO Study and Report. — 

(1) Study. — The Comptroller General of the General Ac- 
countability Office shall conduct an ongoing study on competi- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1323 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



92 



tion and market concentration in the health insurance market 
in the United States after the implementation of the reforms 
in such market under the provisions of, and the amendments 
made by, this Act. Such study shall include an analysis of new 
issuers of health insurance in such market. 

(2) Report. — The Comptroller General shall, not later 
than December 31 of each even-numbered year (beginning with 
2014), report to the appropriate committees of the Congress 
the results of the study conducted under paragraph (1), includ- 
ing any recommendations for administrative or legislative 
changes the Comptroller General determines necessary or ap- 
propriate to increase competition in the health insurance mar- 
ket. 

SEC. 1323. COMMUNITY HEALTH INSURANCE OPTION ISTRICKENJ. 

[Section stricken by section 10104(m)~\ 
SEC. 1323 [42 U.S.C. 18043]. FUNDING FOR THE TERRITORIES. 

[New section 1323 inserted by section 1204(a) of HCERA] 

(a) In General. — A territory that — 

(1) elects consistent with subsection (b) to establish an Ex- 
change in accordance with part II of this subtitle and estab- 
lishes such an Exchange in accordance with such part shall be 
treated as a State for purposes of such part and shall be enti- 
tled to payment from the amount allocated to the territory 
under subsection (c); or 

(2) does not make such election shall be entitled to an in- 
crease in the dollar limitation applicable to the territory under 
subsections (f) and (g) of section 1108 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1308) for such period in such amount for such terri- 
tory and such increase shall not be taken into account in com- 
puting any other amount under such subsections. 

(b) Terms and Conditions. — An election under subsection 
(a)(1) shall— 

(1) not be effective unless the election is consistent with 
section 1321 and is received not later than October 1, 2013; 
and 

(2) be contingent upon entering into an agreement between 
the territory and the Secretary that requires that — 

(A) funds provided under the agreement shall be used 
only to provide premium and cost-sharing assistance to 
residents of the territory obtaining health insurance cov- 
erage through the Exchange; and 

(B) the premium and cost-sharing assistance provided 
under such agreement shall be structured in such a man- 
ner so as to prevent any gap in assistance for individuals 
between the income level at which medical assistance is 
available through the territory's Medicaid plan under title 
XIX of the Social Security Act and the income level at 
which premium and cost-sharing assistance is available 
under the agreement. 

(c) Appropriation and Allocation. — 

(1) Appropriation. — Out of any funds in the Treasury not 
otherwise appropriated, there is appropriated for purposes of 
payment pursuant to subsection (a) $1,000,000,000, to be avail- 
June 9, 2010 



93 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1331 



able during the period beginning with 2014 and ending with 
2019. 

(2) Allocation. — The Secretary shall allocate the amount 
appropriated under paragraph (1) among the territories for 
purposes of carrying out this section as follows: 

(A) For Puerto Rico, $925,000,000. 

(B) For another territory, the portion of $75,000,000 
specified by the Secretary. 

SEC. 1324 [42 U.S.C. 18044]. LEVEL PLAYING FIELD. 

(a) In General. — [As revised by section 10104(n)~\ Notwith- 
standing any other provision of law, any health insurance coverage 
offered by a private health insurance issuer shall not be subject to 
any Federal or State law described in subsection (b) if a qualified 
health plan offered under the Consumer Operated and Oriented 
Plan program under section 1322, or a multi-State qualified health 
plan under section 1334, is not subject to such law. 

(b) Laws Described. — The Federal and State laws described in 
this subsection are those Federal and State laws relating to — 

(1) guaranteed renewal; 

(2) rating; 

(3) preexisting conditions; 

(4) non-discrimination; 

(5) quality improvement and reporting; 

(6) fraud and abuse; 

(7) solvency and financial requirements; 

(8) market conduct; 

(9) prompt payment; 

(10) appeals and grievances; 

(11) privacy and confidentiality; 

(12) licensure; and 

(13) benefit plan material or information. 

PART 4— STATE FLEXIBILITY TO ESTABLISH 
ALTERNATIVE PROGRAMS 

SEC. 1331 [42 U.S.C. 18051]. STATE FLEXIBILITY TO ESTABLISH BASIC 
HEALTH PROGRAMS FOR LOW-INCOME INDP/IDUALS NOT 
ELIGIBLE FOR MEDICAID. 

(a) Establishment of Program. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary shall establish a basic 
health program meeting the requirements of this section under 
which a State may enter into contracts to offer 1 or more 
standard health plans providing at least the essential health 
benefits described in section 1302(b) to eligible individuals in 
lieu of offering such individuals coverage through an Exchange. 

(2) Certifications as to benefit coverage and costs. — 
Such program shall provide that a State may not establish a 
basic health program under this section unless the State estab- 
lishes to the satisfaction of the Secretary, and the Secretary 
certifies, that — 

(A) in the case of an eligible individual enrolled in a 
standard health plan offered through the program, the 
State provides — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1331 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



94 



(i) that the amount of the monthly premium an el- 
igible individual is required to pay for coverage under 
the standard health plan for the individual and the in- 
dividual's dependents does not exceed the amount of 
the monthly premium that the eligible individual 
would have been required to pay (in the rating area in 
which the individual resides) if the individual had en- 
rolled in the applicable second lowest cost silver plan 
(as denned in section 36B(b)(3)(B) of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986) offered to the individual through 
an Exchange; and 

(ii) that the cost-sharing an eligible individual is 
required to pay under the standard health plan does 
not exceed — 

(I) the cost-sharing required under a platinum 
plan in the case of an eligible individual with 
household income not in excess of 150 percent of 
the poverty line for the size of the family involved; 
and 

(II) the cost-sharing required under a gold 
plan in the case of an eligible individual not de- 
scribed in subclause (I); and 

(B) the benefits provided under the standard health 
plans offered through the program cover at least the essen- 
tial health benefits described in section 1302(b). 
For purposes of subparagraph (A)(i), the amount of the month- 
ly premium an individual is required to pay under either the 
standard health plan or the applicable second lowest cost silver 
plan shall be determined after reduction for any premium tax 
credits and cost-sharing reductions allowable with respect to 
either plan. 

(b) Standard Health Plan. — In this section, the term "stand- 
ard heath plan" means a health benefits plan that the State con- 
tracts with under this section — 

(1) under which the only individuals eligible to enroll are 
eligible individuals; 

(2) that provides at least the essential health benefits de- 
scribed in section 1302(b); and 

(3) in the case of a plan that provides health insurance 
coverage offered by a health insurance issuer, that has a med- 
ical loss ratio of at least 85 percent. 

(c) Contracting Process. — 

(1) In general. — A State basic health program shall es- 
tablish a competitive process for entering into contracts with 
standard health plans under subsection (a), including negotia- 
tion of premiums and cost-sharing and negotiation of benefits 
in addition to the essential health benefits described in section 
1302(b). 

(2) Specific items to be considered. — A State shall, as 
part of its competitive process under paragraph (1), include at 
least the following: 

(A) Innovation. — Negotiation with offerors of a stand- 
ard health plan for the inclusion of innovative features in 
the plan, including — 

June 9, 2010 



95 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1331 



(i) care coordination and care management for en- 
rollees, especially for those with chronic health condi- 
tions; 

(ii) incentives for use of preventive services; and 

(iii) the establishment of relationships between 
providers and patients that maximize patient involve- 
ment in health care decision-making, including pro- 
viding incentives for appropriate utilization under the 
plan. 

(B) Health and resource differences. — Consider- 
ation of, and the making of suitable allowances for, dif- 
ferences in health care needs of enrollees and differences 
in local availability of, and access to, health care providers. 
Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed as allow- 
ing discrimination on the basis of pre-existing conditions 
or other health status-related factors. 

(C) Managed care. — Contracting with managed care 
systems, or with systems that offer as many of the at- 
tributes of managed care as are feasible in the local health 
care market. 

(D) Performance measures. — Establishing specific 
performance measures and standards for issuers of stand- 
ard health plans that focus on quality of care and im- 
proved health outcomes, requiring such plans to report to 
the State with respect to the measures and standards, and 
making the performance and quality information available 
to enrollees in a useful form. 

(3) Enhanced availability. — 

(A) Multiple plans. — A State shall, to the maximum 
extent feasible, seek to make multiple standard health 
plans available to eligible individuals within a State to en- 
sure individuals have a choice of such plans. 

(B) Regional compacts.— A State may negotiate a re- 
gional compact with other States to include coverage of eli- 
gible individuals in all such States in agreements with 
issuers of standard health plans. 

(4) Coordination with other state programs. — A State 
shall seek to coordinate the administration of, and provision of 
benefits under, its program under this section with the State 
medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security Act, 
the State child health plan under title XXI of such Act, and 
other State-administered health programs to maximize the effi- 
ciency of such programs and to improve the continuity of care, 
(d) Transfer of Funds to States. — 

(1) In general. — If the Secretary determines that a State 
electing the application of this section meets the requirements 
of the program established under subsection (a), the Secretary 
shall transfer to the State for each fiscal year for which 1 or 
more standard health plans are operating within the State the 
amount determined under paragraph (3). 

(2) Use of funds. — A State shall establish a trust for the 
deposit of the amounts received under paragraph (1) and 
amounts in the trust fund shall only be used to reduce the pre- 
miums and cost-sharing of, or to provide additional benefits 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1331 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



96 



for, eligible individuals enrolled in standard health plans with- 
in the State. Amounts in the trust fund, and expenditures of 
such amounts, shall not be included in determining the 
amount of any non-Federal funds for purposes of meeting any 
matching or expenditure requirement of any federally-funded 
program. 

(3) Amount of payment. — 

(A) Secretarial determination. — 

(i) In general. — [As revised by section 
10104(o)(l)~\ The amount determined under this para- 
graph for any fiscal year is the amount the Secretary 
determines is equal to 95 percent of the premium tax 
credits under section 36B of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986, and the cost-sharing reductions under 
section 1402, that would have been provided for the 
fiscal year to eligible individuals enrolled in standard 
health plans in the State if such eligible individuals 
were allowed to enroll in qualified health plans 
through an Exchange established under this subtitle. 

(ii) Specific requirements. — The Secretary shall 
make the determination under clause (i) on a per en- 
rollee basis and shall take into account all relevant 
factors necessary to determine the value of the pre- 
mium tax credits and cost-sharing reductions that 
would have been provided to eligible individuals de- 
scribed in clause (i), including the age and income of 
the enrollee, whether the enrollment is for self-only or 
family coverage, geographic differences in average 
spending for health care across rating areas, the 
health status of the enrollee for purposes of deter- 
mining risk adjustment payments and reinsurance 
payments that would have been made if the enrollee 
had enrolled in a qualified health plan through an Ex- 
change, and whether any reconciliation of the credit or 
cost-sharing reductions would have occurred if the en- 
rollee had been so enrolled. This determination shall 
take into consideration the experience of other States 
with respect to participation in an Exchange and such 
credits and reductions provided to residents of the 
other States, with a special focus on enrollees with in- 
come below 200 percent of poverty. 

(iii) Certification. — The Chief Actuary of the 
Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services, in consulta- 
tion with the Office of Tax Analysis of the Department 
of the Treasury, shall certify whether the methodology 
used to make determinations under this subpara- 
graph, and such determinations, meet the require- 
ments of clause (ii). Such certifications shall be based 
on sufficient data from the State and from comparable 
States about their experience with programs created 
by this Act. 

(B) Corrections. — The Secretary shall adjust the 
payment for any fiscal year to reflect any error in the de- 
June 9, 2010 



97 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1331 



terminations under subparagraph (A) for any preceding 
fiscal year. 

(4) Application of special rules. — The provisions of sec- 
tion 1303 shall apply to a State basic health program, and to 
standard health plans offered through such program, in the 
same manner as such rules apply to qualified health plans. 

(e) Eligible Individual. — 

(1) In general. — In this section, the term "eligible indi- 
vidual" means, with respect to any State, an individual — 

(A) who a resident of the State who is not eligible to 
enroll in the State's medicaid program under title XIX of 
the Social Security Act for benefits that at a minimum con- 
sist of the essential health benefits described in section 
1302(b); 

(B) [As revised by section 10104(o)(2)~\ whose house- 
hold income exceeds 133 percent but does not exceed 200 
percent of the poverty line for the size of the family in- 
volved, or, in the case of an alien lawfully present in the 
United States, whose income is not greater than 133 per- 
cent of the poverty line for the size of the family involved 
but who is not eligible for the Medicaid program under 
title XIX of the Social Security Act by reason of such alien 
status; 

(C) who is not eligible for minimum essential coverage 
(as defined in section 5000A(f) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986) or is eligible for an employer-sponsored plan 
that is not affordable coverage (as determined under sec- 
tion 5000A(e)(2) of such Code); and 

(D) who has not attained age 65 as of the beginning 
of the plan year. 

Such term shall not include any individual who is not a quali- 
fied individual under section 1312 who is eligible to be covered 
by a qualified health plan offered through an Exchange. 

(2) Eligible individuals may not use exchange. — An eli- 
gible individual shall not be treated as a qualified individual 
under section 1312 eligible for enrollment in a qualified health 
plan offered through an Exchange established under section 
1311. 

(f) Secretarial Oversight. — The Secretary shall each year 
conduct a review of each State program to ensure compliance with 
the requirements of this section, including ensuring that the State 
program meets — 

(1) eligibility verification requirements for participation in 
the program; 

(2) the requirements for use of Federal funds received by 
the program; and 

(3) the quality and performance standards under this sec- 
tion. 

(g) Standard Health Plan Offerors. — A State may provide 
that persons eligible to offer standard health plans under a basic 
health program established under this section may include a li- 
censed health maintenance organization, a licensed health insur- 
ance insurer, or a network of health care providers established to 
offer services under the program. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1332 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



98 



(h) Definitions. — Any term used in this section which is also 
used in section 36B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall 
have the meaning given such term by such section. 

SEC. 1332 [42 U.S.C. 18052]. WAIVER FOR STATE INNOVATION. 

(a) Application. — 

(1) In general. — A State may apply to the Secretary for 
the waiver of all or any requirements described in paragraph 
(2) with respect to health insurance coverage within that State 
for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2017. Such ap- 
plication shall — 

(A) be filed at such time and in such manner as the 
Secretary may require; 

(B) contain such information as the Secretary may re- 
quire, including — 

(i) a comprehensive description of the State legis- 
lation and program to implement a plan meeting the 
requirements for a waiver under this section; and 

(ii) a 10-year budget plan for such plan that is 
budget neutral for the Federal Government; and 

(C) provide an assurance that the State has enacted 
the law described in subsection (b)(2). 

(2) Requirements. — The requirements described in this 
paragraph with respect to health insurance coverage within 
the State for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2014, 
are as follows: 

(A) Part I of subtitle D. 

(B) Part II of subtitle D. 

(C) Section 1402. 

(D) Sections 36B, 4980H, and 5000A of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986. 

(3) Pass through of funding. — With respect to a State 
waiver under paragraph (1), under which, due to the structure 
of the State plan, individuals and small employers in the State 
would not qualify for the premium tax credits, cost-sharing re- 
ductions, or small business credits under sections 36B of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or under part I of subtitle E for 
which they would otherwise be eligible, the Secretary shall pro- 
vide for an alternative means by which the aggregate amount 
of such credits or reductions that would have been paid on be- 
half of participants in the Exchanges established under this 
title had the State not received such waiver, shall be paid to 
the State for purposes of implementing the State plan under 
the waiver. Such amount shall be determined annually by the 
Secretary, taking into consideration the experience of other 
States with respect to participation in an Exchange and credits 
and reductions provided under such provisions to residents of 
the other States. 

(4) Waiver consideration and transparency. — 

(A) In general. — An application for a waiver under 
this section shall be considered by the Secretary in accord- 
ance with the regulations described in subparagraph (B). 

(B) Regulations. — Not later than 180 days after the 
date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promul- 

June 9, 2010 



99 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1332 



gate regulations relating to waivers under this section that 
provide — 

(i) a process for public notice and comment at the 
State level, including public hearings, sufficient to en- 
sure a meaningful level of public input; 

(ii) a process for the submission of an application 
that ensures the disclosure of — 

(I) the provisions of law that the State in- 
volved seeks to waive; and 

(II) the specific plans of the State to ensure 
that the waiver will be in compliance with sub- 
section (b); 

(iii) a process for providing public notice and com- 
ment after the application is received by the Sec- 
retary, that is sufficient to ensure a meaningful level 
of public input and that does not impose requirements 
that are in addition to, or duplicative of, requirements 
imposed under the Administrative Procedures Act, or 
requirements that are unreasonable or unnecessarily 
burdensome with respect to State compliance; 

(iv) a process for the submission to the Secretary 
of periodic reports by the State concerning the imple- 
mentation of the program under the waiver; and 

(v) a process for the periodic evaluation by the 
Secretary of the program under the waiver. 

(C) Report. — The Secretary shall annually report to 
Congress concerning actions taken by the Secretary with 
respect to applications for waivers under this section. 

(5) Coordinated waiver process. — The Secretary shall 
develop a process for coordinating and consolidating the State 
waiver processes applicable under the provisions of this sec- 
tion, and the existing waiver processes applicable under titles 
XVIII, XIX, and XXI of the Social Security Act, and any other 
Federal law relating to the provision of health care items or 
services. Such process shall permit a State to submit a single 
application for a waiver under any or all of such provisions. 

(6) Definition. — In this section, the term "Secretary" 
means — 

(A) the Secretary of Health and Human Services with 
respect to waivers relating to the provisions described in 
subparagraph (A) through (C) of paragraph (2); and 

(B) the Secretary of the Treasury with respect to waiv- 
ers relating to the provisions described in paragraph 
(2)(D). 

(b) Granting of Waivers. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary may grant a request for a 

waiver under subsection (a)(1) only if the Secretary determines 

that the State plan — 

(A) will provide coverage that is at least as com- 
prehensive as the coverage defined in section 1302(b) and 
offered through Exchanges established under this title as 
certified by Office of the Actuary of the Centers for Medi- 
care &amp; Medicaid Services based on sufficient data from the 
State and from comparable States about their experience 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1333 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



100 



with programs created by this Act and the provisions of 
this Act that would be waived; 

(B) will provide coverage and cost sharing protections 
against excessive out-of-pocket spending that are at least 
as affordable as the provisions of this title would provide; 

(C) will provide coverage to at least a comparable 
number of its residents as the provisions of this title would 
provide; and 

(D) will not increase the Federal deficit. 
(2) Requirement to enact a law. — 

(A) In general. — A law described in this paragraph is 
a State law that provides for State actions under a waiver 
under this section, including the implementation of the 
State plan under subsection (a)(1)(B). 

(B) Termination of opt out. — A State may repeal a 
law described in subparagraph (A) and terminate the au- 
thority provided under the waiver with respect to the 
State. 

(c) Scope of Waiver. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary shall determine the scope 
of a waiver of a requirement described in subsection (a)(2) 
granted to a State under subsection (a)(1). 

(2) Limitation. — The Secretary may not waive under this 
section any Federal law or requirement that is not within the 
authority of the Secretary. 

(d) Determinations by Secretary. — 

(1) Time for determination. — The Secretary shall make 
a determination under subsection (a)(1) not later than 180 
days after the receipt of an application from a State under 
such subsection. 

(2) Effect of determination. — 

(A) Granting of waivers. — If the Secretary deter- 
mines to grant a waiver under subsection (a)(1), the Sec- 
retary shall notify the State involved of such determina- 
tion and the terms and effectiveness of such waiver. 

(B) Denial of waiver. — If the Secretary determines a 
waiver should not be granted under subsection (a)(1), the 
Secretary shall notify the State involved, and the appro- 
priate committees of Congress of such determination and 
the reasons therefore. 

(e) Term of Waiver. — No waiver under this section may ex- 
tend over a period of longer than 5 years unless the State requests 
continuation of such waiver, and such request shall be deemed 
granted unless the Secretary, within 90 days after the date of its 
submission to the Secretary, either denies such request in writing 
or informs the State in writing with respect to any additional infor- 
mation which is needed in order to make a final determination 
with respect to the request. 

SEC. 1333 [42 U.S.C. 18053]. PROVISIONS RELATING TO OFFERING OF 
PLANS IN MORE THAN ONE STATE. 

(a) Health Care Choice Compacts. — 

(1) In general. — Not later than July 1, 2013, the Sec- 
retary shall, in consultation with the National Association of 
Insurance Commissioners, issue regulations for the creation of 

June 9, 2010 



101 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1334 



health care choice compacts under which 2 or more States may 
enter into an agreement under which — 

(A) 1 or more qualified health plans could be offered 
in the individual markets in all such States but, except as 
provided in subparagraph (B), only be subject to the laws 
and regulations of the State in which the plan was written 
or issued; 

(B) the issuer of any qualified health plan to which the 
compact applies — 

(i) would continue to be subject to market conduct, 
unfair trade practices, network adequacy, and con- 
sumer protection standards (including standards relat- 
ing to rating), including addressing disputes as to the 
performance of the contract, of the State in which the 
purchaser resides; 

(ii) would be required to be licensed in each State 
in which it offers the plan under the compact or to 
submit to the jurisdiction of each such State with re- 
gard to the standards described in clause (i) (including 
allowing access to records as if the insurer were li- 
censed in the State); and 

(iii) must clearly notify consumers that the policy 
may not be subject to all the laws and regulations of 
the State in which the purchaser resides. 

(2) State authority. — A State may not enter into an 
agreement under this subsection unless the State enacts a law 
after the date of the enactment of this title that specifically au- 
thorizes the State to enter into such agreements. 

(3) Approval of compacts. — The Secretary may approve 
interstate health care choice compacts under paragraph (1) 
only if the Secretary determines that such health care choice 
compact — 

(A) will provide coverage that is at least as com- 
prehensive as the coverage defined in section 1302(b) and 
offered through Exchanges established under this title; 

(B) will provide coverage and cost sharing protections 
against excessive out-of-pocket spending that are at least 
as affordable as the provisions of this title would provide; 

(C) will provide coverage to at least a comparable 
number of its residents as the provisions of this title would 
provide; 

(D) will not increase the Federal deficit; and 

(E) will not weaken enforcement of laws and regula- 
tions described in paragraph (l)(B)(i) in any State that is 
included in such compact. 

(4) Effective date. — A health care choice compact de- 
scribed in paragraph (1) shall not take effect before January 1, 
2016. 

[Subsection (b) stricken by section 10104(p)~\ 
SEC. 1334 [42 U.S.C 18054]. MULTI-STATE PLANS. 

[Section added by section 10104(q)~\ 

(a) Oversight by the Office of Personnel Management. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1334 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



102 



(1) In general. — The Director of the Office of Personnel 
Management (referred to in this section as the "Director") shall 
enter into contracts with health insurance issuers (which may 
include a group of health insurance issuers affiliated either by 
common ownership and control or by the common use of a na- 
tionally licensed service mark), without regard to section 5 of 
title 41, United States Code, or other statutes requiring com- 
petitive bidding, to offer at least 2 multi-State qualified health 
plans through each Exchange in each State. Such plans shall 
provide individual, or in the case of small employers, group 
coverage. 

(2) Terms. — Each contract entered into under paragraph 
(1) shall be for a uniform term of at least 1 year, but may be 
made automatically renewable from term to term in the ab- 
sence of notice of termination by either party. In entering into 
such contracts, the Director shall ensure that health benefits 
coverage is provided in accordance with the types of coverage 
provided for under section 2701(a)(l)(A)(i) of the Public Health 
Service Act. 

(3) Non-profit entities. — In entering into contracts under 
paragraph (1), the Director shall ensure that at least one con- 
tract is entered into with a non-profit entity. 

(4) Administration. — The Director shall implement this 
subsection in a manner similar to the manner in which the Di- 
rector implements the contracting provisions with respect to 
carriers under the Federal employees health benefit program 
under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, including 
(through negotiating with each multi-state plan) — 

(A) a medical loss ratio; 

(B) a profit margin; 

(C) the premiums to be charged; and 

(D) such other terms and conditions of coverage as are 
in the interests of enrollees in such plans. 

(5) Authority to protect consumers. — The Director may 
prohibit the offering of any multi-State health plan that does 
not meet the terms and conditions defined by the Director with 
respect to the elements described in subparagraphs (A) 
through (D) of paragraph (4). 

(6) Assured availability of varied coverage. — In enter- 
ing into contracts under this subsection, the Director shall en- 
sure that with respect to multi-State qualified health plans of- 
fered in an Exchange, there is at least one such plan that does 
not provide coverage of services described in section 
1303(b)(l)(B)(i). 

(7) Withdrawal. — Approval of a contract under this sub- 
section may be withdrawn by the Director only after notice and 
opportunity for hearing to the issuer concerned without regard 
to subchapter II of chapter 5 and chapter 7 of title 5, United 
States Code. 

(b) Eligibility. — A health insurance issuer shall be eligible to 
enter into a contract under subsection (a)(1) if such issuer — 

(1) agrees to offer a multi-State qualified health plan that 
meets the requirements of subsection (c) in each Exchange in 
each State; 

June 9, 2010 



103 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1334 



(2) is licensed in each State and is subject to all require- 
ments of State law not inconsistent with this section, including 
the standards and requirements that a State imposes that do 
not prevent the application of a requirement of part A of title 
XXVII of the Public Health Service Act or a requirement of 
this title; 

(3) otherwise complies with the minimum standards pre- 
scribed for carriers offering health benefits plans under section 
8902(e) of title 5, United States Code, to the extent that such 
standards do not conflict with a provision of this title; and 

(4) meets such other requirements as determined appro- 
priate by the Director, in consultation with the Secretary. 

(c) Requirements for Multi-State Qualified Health 
Plan. — 

(1) In general. — A multi-State qualified health plan 
meets the requirements of this subsection if, in the determina- 
tion of the Director — 

(A) the plan offers a benefits package that is uniform 
in each State and consists of the essential benefits de- 
scribed in section 1302; 

(B) the plan meets all requirements of this title with 
respect to a qualified health plan, including requirements 
relating to the offering of the bronze, silver, and gold levels 
of coverage and catastrophic coverage in each State Ex- 
change; 

(C) except as provided in paragraph (5), the issuer pro- 
vides for determinations of premiums for coverage under 
the plan on the basis of the rating requirements of part A 
of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act; and 

(D) the issuer offers the plan in all geographic regions, 
and in all States that have adopted adjusted community 
rating before the date of enactment of this Act. 

(2) States may offer additional benefits. — Nothing in 
paragraph (1)(A) shall preclude a State from requiring that 
benefits in addition to the essential health benefits required 
under such paragraph be provided to enrollees of a multi-State 
qualified health plan offered in such State. 

(3) Credits. — 

(A) In general. — An individual enrolled in a multi- 
State qualified health plan under this section shall be eli- 
gible for credits under section 36B of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 and cost sharing assistance under section 
1402 in the same manner as an individual who is enrolled 
in a qualified health plan. 

(B) No additional federal cost. — A requirement by 
a State under paragraph (2) that benefits in addition to 
the essential health benefits required under paragraph 
(1)(A) be provided to enrollees of a multi-State qualified 
health plan shall not affect the amount of a premium tax 
credit provided under section 36B of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 with respect to such plan. 

(4) State must assume cost.— A State shall make pay- 
ments — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1334 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



104 



(A) to an individual enrolled in a multi-State qualified 
health plan offered in such State; or 

(B) on behalf of an individual described in subpara- 
graph (A) directly to the multi-State qualified health plan 
in which such individual is enrolled; 

to defray the cost of any additional benefits described in para- 
graph (2). 

(5) Application of certain state rating require- 
ments. — With respect to a multi-State qualified health plan 
that is offered in a State with age rating requirements that are 
lower than 3:1, the State may require that Exchanges oper- 
ating in such State only permit the offering of such multi-State 
qualified health plans if such plans comply with the State's 
more protective age rating requirements. 

(d) Plans Deemed To Be Certified. — A multi-State qualified 
health plan that is offered under a contract under subsection (a) 
shall be deemed to be certified by an Exchange for purposes of sec- 
tion 1311(d)(4)(A). 

(e) Phase-in. — Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2) of sub- 
section (b), the Director shall enter into a contract with a health 
insurance issuer for the offering of a multi-State qualified health 
plan under subsection (a) if — 

(1) with respect to the first year for which the issuer offers 
such plan, such issuer offers the plan in at least 60 percent of 
the States; 

(2) with respect to the second such year, such issuer offers 
the plan in at least 70 percent of the States; 

(3) with respect to the third such year, such issuer offers 
the plan in at least 85 percent of the States; and 

(4) with respect to each subsequent year, such issuer offers 
the plan in all States. 

(f) Applicability. — The requirements under chapter 89 of title 
5, United States Code, applicable to health benefits plans under 
such chapter shall apply to multi-State qualified health plans pro- 
vided for under this section to the extent that such requirements 
do not conflict with a provision of this title. 

(g) Continued Support for FEHBP. — 

(1) Maintenance of effort. — Nothing in this section 
shall be construed to permit the Director to allocate fewer fi- 
nancial or personnel resources to the functions of the Office of 
Personnel Management related to the administration of the 
Federal Employees Health Benefit Program under chapter 89 
of title 5, United States Code. 

(2) Separate risk pool. — Enrollees in multi-State quali- 
fied health plans under this section shall be treated as a sepa- 
rate risk pool apart from enrollees in the Federal Employees 
Health Benefit Program under chapter 89 of title 5, United 
States Code. 

(3) Authority to establish separate entities. — The Di- 
rector may establish such separate units or offices within the 
Office of Personnel Management as the Director determines to 
be appropriate to ensure that the administration of multi-State 
qualified health plans under this section does not interfere 
with the effective administration of the Federal Employees 

June 9, 2010 



105 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1341 



Health Benefit Program under chapter 89 of title 5, United 
States Code. 

(4) Effective oversight. — The Director may appoint such 
additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Direc- 
tor to carry out activities under this section. 

(5) Assurance of separate program. — In carrying out 
this section, the Director shall ensure that the program under 
this section is separate from the Federal Employees Health 
Benefit Program under chapter 89 of title 5, United States 
Code. Premiums paid for coverage under a multi-State quali- 
fied health plan under this section shall not be considered to 
be Federal funds for any purposes. 

(6) FEHBP PLANS NOT REQUIRED TO PARTICIPATE. — Noth- 
ing in this section shall require that a carrier offering coverage 
under the Federal Employees Health Benefit Program under 
chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, also offer a multi- 
State qualified health plan under this section. 

(h) Advisory Board. — The Director shall establish an advisory 
board to provide recommendations on the activities described in 
this section. A significant percentage of the members of such board 
shall be comprised of enrollees in a multi-State qualified health 
plan, or representatives of such enrollees. 

(i) Authorization of Appropriations. — There is authorized to 
be appropriated, such sums as may be necessary to carry out this 
section. 

PART 5— REINSURANCE AND RISK 
ADJUSTMENT 

SEC. 1341 [42 U.S.C. 18061]. TRANSITIONAL REINSURANCE PROGRAM 
FOR INDIVIDUAL MARKET IN EACH STATE. 

[Section heading amended by section 10104(r)(l)~\ 

(a) In General. — Each State shall, not later than January 1, 
2014— 

(1) include in the Federal standards or State law or regula- 
tion the State adopts and has in effect under section 1321(b) 
the provisions described in subsection (b); and 

(2) establish (or enter into a contract with) 1 or more ap- 
plicable reinsurance entities to carry out the reinsurance pro- 
gram under this section. 

(b) Model Regulation. — 

(1) In general. — In establishing the Federal standards 
under section 1321(a), the Secretary, in consultation with the 
National Association of Insurance Commissioners (the "NAIC"), 
shall include provisions that enable States to establish and 
maintain a program under which — 

(A) health insurance issuers, and third party adminis- 
trators on behalf of group health plans, are required to 
make payments to an applicable reinsurance entity for any 
plan year beginning in the 3-year period beginning Janu- 
ary 1, 2014 (as specified in paragraph (3); and 

(B) the applicable reinsurance entity collects payments 
under subparagraph (A) and uses amounts so collected to 
make reinsurance payments to health insurance issuers 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1341 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



106 



described in subparagraph (A) that cover high risk individ- 
uals in the individual market (excluding grandfathered 
health plans) for any plan year beginning in such 3-year 
period. 

(2) High-risk individual; payment amounts. — The Sec- 
retary shall include the following in the provisions under para- 
graph (1): 

(A) Determination of high-risk individuals. — The 
method by which individuals will be identified as high risk 
individuals for purposes of the reinsurance program estab- 
lished under this section. Such method shall provide for 
identification of individuals as high-risk individuals on the 
basis of — 

(i) a list of at least 50 but not more than 100 med- 
ical conditions that are identified as high-risk condi- 
tions and that may be based on the identification of di- 
agnostic and procedure codes that are indicative of in- 
dividuals with pre-existing, high-risk conditions; or 

(ii) any other comparable objective method of iden- 
tification recommended by the American Academy of 
Actuaries. 

(B) Payment amount. — [As revised by section 
10104(r)(2)~\ The formula for determining the amount of 
payments that will be paid to health insurance issuers de- 
scribed in paragraph (1)(B) that insure high-risk individ- 
uals. Such formula shall provide for the equitable alloca- 
tion of available funds through reconciliation and may be 
designed — 

(i) to provide a schedule of payments that specifies 
the amount that will be paid for each of the conditions 
identified under subparagraph (A); or 

(ii) to use any other comparable method for deter- 
mining payment amounts that is recommended by the 
American Academy of Actuaries and that encourages 
the use of care coordination and care management 
programs for high risk conditions. 

(3) Determination of required contributions. — 

(A) In general. — The Secretary shall include in the 
provisions under paragraph (1) the method for determining 
the amount each health insurance issuer and group health 
plan described in paragraph (1)(A) contributing to the rein- 
surance program under this section is required to con- 
tribute under such paragraph for each plan year beginning 
in the 36-month period beginning January 1, 2014. The 
contribution amount for any plan year may be based on 
the percentage of revenue of each issuer and the total costs 
of providing benefits to enrollees in self-insured plans or 
on a specified amount per enrollee and may be required to 
be paid in advance or periodically throughout the plan 
year. 

(B) Specific requirements. — The method under this 
paragraph shall be designed so that — 

(i) the contribution amount for each issuer propor- 
tionally reflects each issuer's fully insured commercial 

June 9, 2010 



107 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1341 



book of business for all major medical products and 
the total value of all fees charged by the issuer and 
the costs of coverage administered by the issuer as a 
third party administrator; 

(ii) the contribution amount can include an addi- 
tional amount to fund the administrative expenses of 
the applicable reinsurance entity; 

(iii) the aggregate contribution amounts for all 
States shall, based on the best estimates of the NAIC 
and without regard to amounts described in clause (ii), 
equal $10,000,000,000 for plan years beginning in 
2014, $6,000,000,000 for plan years beginning 2015, 
and $4,000,000,000 for plan years beginning in 2016; 
and 

(iv) in addition to the aggregate contribution 
amounts under clause (iii), each issuer's contribution 
amount for any calendar year under clause (iii) re- 
flects its proportionate share of an additional 
$2,000,000,000 for 2014, an additional $2,000,000,000 
for 2015, and an additional $1,000,000,000 for 2016. 

Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed to pre- 
clude a State from collecting additional amounts from 
issuers on a voluntary basis. 

(4) Expenditure of funds. — The provisions under para- 
graph (1) shall provide that — 

(A) the contribution amounts collected for any cal- 
endar year may be allocated and used in any of the three 
calendar years for which amounts are collected based on 
the reinsurance needs of a particular period or to reflect 
experience in a prior period; and 

(B) amounts remaining unexpended as of December, 
2016, may be used to make payments under any reinsur- 
ance program of a State in the individual market in effect 
in the 2-year period beginning on January 1, 2017. 

Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, any contribution 
amounts described in paragraph (3)(B)(iv) shall be deposited 
into the general fund of the Treasury of the United States and 
may not be used for the program established under this sec- 
tion. 

(c) Applicable Reinsurance Entity. — For purposes of this 
section — 

(1) In general. — The term "applicable reinsurance entity" 
means a not-for-profit organization — 

(A) [As revised by section 10104(r)(3)~\ the purpose of 
which is to help stabilize premiums for coverage in the in- 
dividual market in a State during the first 3 years of oper- 
ation of an Exchange for such markets within the State 
when the risk of adverse selection related to new rating 
rules and market changes is greatest; and 

(B) the duties of which shall be to carry out the rein- 
surance program under this section by coordinating the 
funding and operation of the risk-spreading mechanisms 
designed to implement the reinsurance program. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1342 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



108 



(2) State discretion. — A State may have more than 1 ap- 
plicable reinsurance entity to carry out the reinsurance pro- 
gram under this section within the State and 2 or more States 
may enter into agreements to provide for an applicable reinsur- 
ance entity to carry out such program in all such States. 

(3) Entities are tax-exempt. — An applicable reinsurance 
entity established under this section shall be exempt from tax- 
ation under chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. 
The preceding sentence shall not apply to the tax imposed by 
section 511 such Code (relating to tax on unrelated business 
taxable income of an exempt organization). 

(d) Coordination With State High-risk Pools. — The State 
shall eliminate or modify any State high-risk pool to the extent 
necessary to carry out the reinsurance program established under 
this section. The State may coordinate the State high-risk pool with 
such program to the extent not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this section. 

SEC. 1342 [42 U.S.C. 18062]. ESTABLISHMENT OF RISK CORRIDORS FOR 
PLANS IN INDIVIDUAL AND SMALL GROUP MARKETS. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary shall establish and administer 
a program of risk corridors for calendar years 2014, 2015, and 2016 
under which a qualified health plan offered in the individual or 
small group market shall participate in a payment adjustment sys- 
tem based on the ratio of the allowable costs of the plan to the 
plan's aggregate premiums. Such program shall be based on the 
program for regional participating provider organizations under 
part D of title XVIII of the Social Security Act. 

(b) Payment Methodology. — 

(1) Payments out. — The Secretary shall provide under the 
program established under subsection (a) that if — 

(A) a participating plan's allowable costs for any plan 
year are more than 103 percent but not more than 108 
percent of the target amount, the Secretary shall pay to 
the plan an amount equal to 50 percent of the target 
amount in excess of 103 percent of the target amount; and 

(B) a participating plan's allowable costs for any plan 
year are more than 108 percent of the target amount, the 
Secretary shall pay to the plan an amount equal to the 
sum of 2.5 percent of the target amount plus 80 percent 
of allowable costs in excess of 108 percent of the target 
amount. 

(2) Payments in. — The Secretary shall provide under the 
program established under subsection (a) that if — 

(A) a participating plan's allowable costs for any plan 
year are less than 97 percent but not less than 92 percent 
of the target amount, the plan shall pay to the Secretary 
an amount equal to 50 percent of the excess of 97 percent 
of the target amount over the allowable costs; and 

(B) a participating plan's allowable costs for any plan 
year are less than 92 percent of the target amount, the 
plan shall pay to the Secretary an amount equal to the 
sum of 2.5 percent of the target amount plus 80 percent 
of the excess of 92 percent of the target amount over the 
allowable costs. 

June 9, 2010 



109 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1343 



(c) Definitions. — In this section: 

(1) Allowable costs. — 

(A) In general. — The amount of allowable costs of a 
plan for any year is an amount equal to the total costs 
(other than administrative costs) of the plan in providing 
benefits covered by the plan. 

(B) Reduction for risk adjustment and reinsur- 
ance payments. — Allowable costs shall reduced by any 
risk adjustment and reinsurance payments received under 
section 1341 and 1343. 

(2) Target amount. — The target amount of a plan for any 
year is an amount equal to the total premiums (including any 
premium subsidies under any governmental program), reduced 
by the administrative costs of the plan. 

SEC. 1343 [42 U.S.C. 18063]. RISK ADJUSTMENT. 

(a) In General. — 

(1) Low actuarial risk plans. — Using the criteria and 
methods developed under subsection (b), each State shall as- 
sess a charge on health plans and health insurance issuers 
(with respect to health insurance coverage) described in sub- 
section (c) if the actuarial risk of the enrollees of such plans 
or coverage for a year is less than the average actuarial risk 
of all enrollees in all plans or coverage in such State for such 
year that are not self-insured group health plans (which are 
subject to the provisions of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974). 

(2) High actuarial risk plans. — Using the criteria and 
methods developed under subsection (b), each State shall pro- 
vide a payment to health plans and health insurance issuers 
(with respect to health insurance coverage) described in sub- 
section (c) if the actuarial risk of the enrollees of such plans 
or coverage for a year is greater than the average actuarial 
risk of all enrollees in all plans and coverage in such State for 
such year that are not self-insured group health plans (which 
are subject to the provisions of the Employee Retirement In- 
come Security Act of 1974). 

(b) Criteria and Methods. — The Secretary, in consultation 
with States, shall establish criteria and methods to be used in car- 
rying out the risk adjustment activities under this section. The Sec- 
retary may utilize criteria and methods similar to the criteria and 
methods utilized under part C or D of title XVIII of the Social Se- 
curity Act. Such criteria and methods shall be included in the 
standards and requirements the Secretary prescribes under section 
1321. 

(c) Scope. — A health plan or a health insurance issuer is de- 
scribed in this subsection if such health plan or health insurance 
issuer provides coverage in the individual or small group market 
within the State. This subsection shall not apply to a grand- 
fathered health plan or the issuer of a grandfathered health plan 
with respect to that plan. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1401 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



110 



Subtitle E — Affordable Coverage Choices 
for All Americans 

PART I— PREMIUM TAX CREDITS AND COST- 
SHARING REDUCTIONS 

Subpart A — Premium Tax Credits and Cost- 
sharing Reductions 

SEC. 1401. REFUNDABLE TAX CREDIT PROVIDING PREMIUM ASSIST- 
ANCE FOR COVERAGE UNDER A QUALIFIED HEALTH 
PLAN. 

(a) In General. — Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of 
chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refund- 
able credits) is amended by inserting after section 36A the fol- 
lowing new section: 

"SEC. 36B. REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR COVERAGE UNDER A QUALI- 
FIED HEALTH PLAN. 

"(a) In General. — In the case of an applicable taxpayer, there 
shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle 
for any taxable year an amount equal to the premium assistance 
credit amount of the taxpayer for the taxable year. 

"(b) Premium Assistance Credit Amount. — For purposes of 
this section — 

"(1) In general. — The term 'premium assistance credit 
amount' means, with respect to any taxable year, the sum of 
the premium assistance amounts determined under paragraph 
(2) with respect to all coverage months of the taxpayer occur- 
ring during the taxable year. 

"(2) Premium assistance amount. — The premium assist- 
ance amount determined under this subsection with respect to 
any coverage month is the amount equal to the lesser of — 

"(A) the monthly premiums for such month for 1 or 
more qualified health plans offered in the individual mar- 
ket within a State which cover the taxpayer, the tax- 
payer's spouse, or any dependent (as defined in section 
152) of the taxpayer and which were enrolled in through 
an Exchange established by the State under 1311 of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, or 
"(B) the excess (if any) of — 

"(i) the adjusted monthly premium for such month 
for the applicable second lowest cost silver plan with 
respect to the taxpayer, over 

"(ii) an amount equal to 1/12 of the product of the 
applicable percentage and the taxpayer's household in- 
come for the taxable year. 
"(3) Other terms and rules relating to premium as- 
sistance amounts. — For purposes of paragraph (2) — 
"(A) Applicable percentage. — 

"(i) In general. — [As revised by section 
1001(a)(1)(A) ofHCERA] Except as provided in clause 
(ii), the applicable percentage for any taxable year 

June 9, 2010 



111 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1401V36B IRC 



shall be the percentage such that the applicable per- 
centage for any taxpayer whose household income is 
within an income tier specified in the following table 
shall increase, on a sliding scale in a linear manner, 
from the initial premium percentage to the final pre- 
mium percentage specified in such table for such in- 
come tier: 

"In the case of household income (ex- T . „ „ r „ mi „ m „„„ T , *■ . „„ m :„ m „„, 
pressed as a percent of poverty line) The Imtia P remmm P er ~ The fma P remium P er ~ 
within the following income tier: centage ls ~ centage ls ~ 

Up to 133% 2.0% 2.0% 

133% up to 150% 3.0% 4.0% 

150% up to 200% 4.0% 6.3% 

200% up to 250% 6.3% 8.05% 

250% up to 300% 8.05% 9.5% 

300% up to 400% 9.5% 9.5% 

"(ii) Indexing. — [As added by section 
1001(a)(1)(B) of HCERA instead of clauses (ii) and (Hi) 
previously here\ 

"(I) In general. — Subject to subclause (II), in 
the case of taxable years beginning in any cal- 
endar year after 2014, the initial and final appli- 
cable percentages under clause (i) (as in effect for 
the preceding calendar year after application of 
this clause) shall be adjusted to reflect the excess 
of the rate of premium growth for the preceding 
calendar year over the rate of income growth for 
the preceding calendar year. 

"(II) Additional adjustment. — Except as 
provided in subclause (III), in the case of any cal- 
endar year after 2018, the percentages described 
in subclause (I) shall, in addition to the adjust- 
ment under subclause (I), be adjusted to reflect 
the excess (if any) of the rate of premium growth 
estimated under subclause (I) for the preceding 
calendar year over the rate of growth in the con- 
sumer price index for the preceding calendar year. 

"(Ill) Failsafe— Subclause (II) shall apply for 
any calendar year only if the aggregate amount of 
premium tax credits under this section and cost- 
sharing reductions under section 1402 of the Pa- 
tient Protection and Affordable Care Act for the 
preceding calendar year exceeds an amount equal 
to 0.504 percent of the gross domestic product for 
the preceding calendar year. 
"(B) Applicable second lowest cost silver plan. — 
The applicable second lowest cost silver plan with respect 
to any applicable taxpayer is the second lowest cost silver 
plan of the individual market in the rating area in which 
the taxpayer resides which — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1401X36B IRC 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



112 



"(i) is offered through the same Exchange through 
which the qualified health plans taken into account 
under paragraph (2)(A) were offered, and 
"(ii) provides — 

"(I) self-only coverage in the case of an appli- 
cable taxpayer — 

"(aa) whose tax for the taxable year is de- 
termined under section 1(c) (relating to un- 
married individuals other than surviving 
spouses and heads of households) and who is 
not allowed a deduction under section 151 for 
the taxable year with respect to a dependent, 
or 

"(bb) who is not described in item (aa) but 
who purchases only self-only coverage, and 
"(II) family coverage in the case of any other 
applicable taxpayer. 
If a taxpayer files a joint return and no credit is allowed 
under this section with respect to 1 of the spouses by rea- 
son of subsection (e), the taxpayer shall be treated as de- 
scribed in clause (h)(1) unless a deduction is allowed under 
section 151 for the taxable year with respect to a depend- 
ent other than either spouse and subsection (e) does not 
apply to the dependent. 

"(C) Adjusted monthly premium. — The adjusted 
monthly premium for an applicable second lowest cost sil- 
ver plan is the monthly premium which would have been 
charged (for the rating area with respect to which the pre- 
miums under paragraph (2)(A) were determined) for the 
plan if each individual covered under a qualified health 
plan taken into account under paragraph (2)(A) were cov- 
ered by such silver plan and the premium was adjusted 
only for the age of each such individual in the manner al- 
lowed under section 2701 of the Public Health Service Act. 
In the case of a State participating in the wellness dis- 
count demonstration project under section 2705(d) of the 
Public Health Service Act, the adjusted monthly premium 
shall be determined without regard to any premium dis- 
count or rebate under such project. 
"(D) Additional benefits. — If— 

"(i) a qualified health plan under section 
1302(b)(5) of the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act offers benefits in addition to the essential 
health benefits required to be provided by the plan, or 
"(ii) a State requires a qualified health plan under 
section 1311(d)(3)(B) of such Act to cover benefits in 
addition to the essential health benefits required to be 
provided by the plan, 
the portion of the premium for the plan properly allocable 
(under rules prescribed by the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services) to such additional benefits shall not be 
taken into account in determining either the monthly pre- 
mium or the adjusted monthly premium under paragraph 
(2). 

June 9, 2010 



113 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1401X36B IRC 



"(E) Special rule for pediatric dental coverage. — 
For purposes of determining the amount of any monthly 
premium, if an individual enrolls in both a qualified health 
plan and a plan described in section 1311(d)(2)(B)(ii)(I) of 
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act for any 
plan year, the portion of the premium for the plan de- 
scribed in such section that (under regulations prescribed 
by the Secretary) is properly allocable to pediatric dental 
benefits which are included in the essential health benefits 
required to be provided by a qualified health plan under 
section 1302(b)(l)(J) of such Act shall be treated as a pre- 
mium payable for a qualified health plan. 
"(c) Definition and Rules Relating to Applicable Tax- 
payers, Coverage Months, and Qualified Health Plan. — For 
purposes of this section — 

"(1) Applicable taxpayer. — 

"(A) In general. — [As revised by section 10105(b)] 
The term 'applicable taxpayer' means, with respect to any 
taxable year, a taxpayer whose household income for the 
taxable year equals or exceeds 100 percent but does not ex- 
ceed 400 percent of an amount equal to the poverty line for 
a family of the size involved. 

"(B) Special rule for certain individuals law- 
fully PRESENT IN THE UNITED STATES. — If— 

"(i) a taxpayer has a household income which is 

not greater than 100 percent of an amount equal to 

the poverty line for a family of the size involved, and 
"(ii) the taxpayer is an alien lawfully present in 

the United States, but is not eligible for the medicaid 

program under title XIX of the Social Security Act by 

reason of such alien status, 
the taxpayer shall, for purposes of the credit under this 
section, be treated as an applicable taxpayer with a house- 
hold income which is equal to 100 percent of the poverty 
line for a family of the size involved. 

"(C) Married couples must file joint return. — If 
the taxpayer is married (within the meaning of section 
7703) at the close of the taxable year, the taxpayer shall 
be treated as an applicable taxpayer only if the taxpayer 
and the taxpayer's spouse file a joint return for the taxable 
year. 

"(D) Denial of credit to dependents. — No credit 
shall be allowed under this section to any individual with 
respect to whom a deduction under section 151 is allow- 
able to another taxpayer for a taxable year beginning in 
the calendar year in which such individual's taxable year 
begins. 

"(2) Coverage month. — For purposes of this subsection — 
"(A) In general. — The term 'coverage month means, 

with respect to an applicable taxpayer, any month if — 

"(i) as of the first day of such month the taxpayer, 
the taxpayer's spouse, or any dependent of the tax- 
payer is covered by a qualified health plan described 
in subsection (b)(2)(A) that was enrolled in through an 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1401X36B IRC 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



114 



Exchange established by the State under section 1311 
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, and 
"(ii) the premium for coverage under such plan for 
such month is paid by the taxpayer (or through ad- 
vance payment of the credit under subsection (a) 
under section 1412 of the Patient Protection and Af- 
fordable Care Act). 

"(B) Exception for minimum essential coverage. — 
"(i) In general. — The term 'coverage month' shall 
not include any month with respect to an individual if 
for such month the individual is eligible for minimum 
essential coverage other than eligibility for coverage 
described in section 5000A(f)(l)(C) (relating to cov- 
erage in the individual market). 

"(ii) Minimum essential coverage. — The term 
'minimum essential coverage' has the meaning given 
such term by section 5000A(f). 

"(C) Special rule for employer-sponsored minimum 
essential coverage. — For purposes of subparagraph 
(B)— 

"(i) Coverage must be affordable. — Except as 
provided in clause (iii), an employee shall not be treat- 
ed as eligible for minimum essential coverage if such 
coverage — 

"(I) consists of an eligible employer-sponsored 
plan (as denned in section 5000A(f)(2)), and 

"(II) the employee's required contribution 
(within the meaning of section 5000A(e)(l)(B)) 
with respect to the plan exceeds 9.5 percent of the 
applicable taxpayer's household income. [As re- 
vised by section 1001(a)(2)(A) ofHCERA] 
This clause shall also apply to an individual who is eli- 
gible to enroll in the plan by reason of a relationship 
the individual bears to the employee. 

"(ii) Coverage must provide minimum value. — 
Except as provided in clause (iii), an employee shall 
not be treated as eligible for minimum essential cov- 
erage if such coverage consists of an eligible employer- 
sponsored plan (as denned in section 5000A(f)(2)) and 
the plan's share of the total allowed costs of benefits 
provided under the plan is less than 60 percent of 
such costs. 

"(iii) Employee or family must not be covered 
under employer plan. — Clauses (i) and (ii) shall not 
apply if the employee (or any individual described in 
the last sentence of clause (i)) is covered under the eli- 
gible employer-sponsored plan or the grandfathered 
health plan. 

"(iv) Indexing. — [As revised by section 10105(c) 
and sections 1001(a)(2)(A) and (B) of HCERA] In the 
case of plan years beginning in any calendar year after 
2014, the Secretary shall adjust the 9.5 percent under 
clause (i)(II) in the same manner as the percentages 
are adjusted under subsection (b)(3)(A)(ii). 

June 9, 2010 



115 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1401V36B IRC 



"(D) Exception for individual receiving free 
CHOICE VOUCHERS. — [As added by section 10107(h)(1), ef- 
fective for taxable year beginning after December 31, 2013] 
The term 'coverage month' shall not include any month in 
which such individual has a free choice voucher provided 
under section 10108 of the Patient Protection and Afford- 
able Care Act. 

"(3) Definitions and other rules. — 

"(A) Qualified health plan. — The term 'qualified 
health plan' has the meaning given such term by section 
1301(a) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 
except that such term shall not include a qualified health 
plan which is a catastrophic plan described in section 
1302(e) of such Act. 

"(B) Grandfathered health plan. — The term 'grand- 
fathered health plan' has the meaning given such term by 
section 1251 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act. 

"(d) Terms Relating to Income and Families. — For purposes 
of this section — 

"(1) Family size. — The family size involved with respect to 
any taxpayer shall be equal to the number of individuals for 
whom the taxpayer is allowed a deduction under section 151 
(relating to allowance of deduction for personal exemptions) for 
the taxable year. 

"(2) Household income. — 

"(A) Household income. — The term 'household in- 
come' means, with respect to any taxpayer, an amount 
equal to the sum of — [.Clauses (i) and (ii) revised by section 
1004(a)(1)(A) ofHCERA} 

"(i) the modified adjusted gross income of the tax- 
payer, plus 

"(ii) the aggregate modified adjusted gross in- 
comes of all other individuals who — 

"(I) were taken into account in determining 
the taxpayer's family size under paragraph (1), 
and 

"(II) were required to file a return of tax im- 
posed by section 1 for the taxable year. 
"(B) Modified adjusted gross income. — [Replaced 
by section 1004(a)(2) of HCERA\ The term 'modified ad- 
justed gross income' means adjusted gross income in- 
creased by — 

"(i) any amount excluded from gross income under 

section 911, and 

"(ii) any amount of interest received or accrued by 

the taxpayer during the taxable year which is exempt 

from tax. 
"(3) Poverty line. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'poverty line' has the 
meaning given that term in section 2110(c)(5) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397jj(c)(5)). 

"(B) Poverty line used. — In the case of any qualified 
health plan offered through an Exchange for coverage dur- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1401X36B IRC 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



116 



ing a taxable year beginning in a calendar year, the pov- 
erty line used shall be the most recently published poverty 
line as of the 1st day of the regular enrollment period for 
coverage during such calendar year. 
"(e) Rules for Individuals Not Lawfully Present. — 

"(1) In general. — If 1 or more individuals for whom a tax- 
payer is allowed a deduction under section 151 (relating to al- 
lowance of deduction for personal exemptions) for the taxable 
year (including the taxpayer or his spouse) are individuals who 
are not lawfully present — 

"(A) the aggregate amount of premiums otherwise 
taken into account under clauses (i) and (ii) of subsection 
(b)(2)(A) shall be reduced by the portion (if any) of such 
premiums which is attributable to such individuals, and 

"(B) for purposes of applying this section, the deter- 
mination as to what percentage a taxpayer's household in- 
come bears to the poverty level for a family of the size in- 
volved shall be made under one of the following methods: 
"(i) A method under which — 

"(I) the taxpayer's family size is determined 
by not taking such individuals into account, and 

"(II) the taxpayer's household income is equal 
to the product of the taxpayer's household income 
(determined without regard to this subsection) 
and a fraction — 

"(aa) the numerator of which is the pov- 
erty line for the taxpayer's family size deter- 
mined after application of subclause (I), and 

"(bb) the denominator of which is the pov- 
erty line for the taxpayer's family size deter- 
mined without regard to subclause (I), 
"(ii) A comparable method reaching the same re- 
sult as the method under clause (i). 
"(2) Lawfully present. — For purposes of this section, an 
individual shall be treated as lawfully present only if the indi- 
vidual is, and is reasonably expected to be for the entire period 
of enrollment for which the credit under this section is being 
claimed, a citizen or national of the United States or an alien 
lawfully present in the United States. 

"(3) Secretarial authority. — The Secretary of Health 
and Human Services, in consultation with the Secretary, shall 
prescribe rules setting forth the methods by which calculations 
of family size and household income are made for purposes of 
this subsection. Such rules shall be designed to ensure that the 
least burden is placed on individuals enrolling in qualified 
health plans through an Exchange and taxpayers eligible for 
the credit allowable under this section. 
"(f) Reconciliation of Credit and Advance Credit. — 

"(1) In general. — The amount of the credit allowed under 
this section for any taxable year shall be reduced (but not 
below zero) by the amount of any advance payment of such 
credit under section 1412 of the Patient Protection and Afford- 
able Care Act. 

"(2) Excess advance payments. — 

June 9, 2010 



117 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1401V36B IRC 



"(A) In general. — If the advance payments to a tax- 
payer under section 1412 of the Patient Protection and Af- 
fordable Care Act for a taxable year exceed the credit al- 
lowed by this section (determined without regard to para- 
graph (1)), the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable 
year shall be increased by the amount of such excess. 

"(B) Limitation on increase where income less 

THAN 400 PERCENT OF POVERTY LINE. — 

"(i) In general. — In the case of an applicable tax- 
payer whose household income is less than 400 per- 
cent of the poverty line for the size of the family in- 
volved for the taxable year, the amount of the increase 
under subparagraph (A) shall in no event exceed $400 
($250 in the case of a taxpayer whose tax is deter- 
mined under section 1(c) for the taxable year). 

"(ii) Indexing of amount. — In the case of any cal- 
endar year beginning after 2014, each of the dollar 
amounts under clause (i) shall be increased by an 
amount equal to — 

"(I) such dollar amount, multiplied by 
"(II) the cost-of-living adjustment determined 
under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year, deter- 
mined by substituting 'calendar year 2013' for 'cal- 
endar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof. 
"(3) Information requirement. — [As revised by section 
1004(c) of HCERA] Each Exchange (or any person carrying out 
1 or more responsibilities of an Exchange under section 
1311(f)(3) or 1321(c) of the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act) shall provide the following information to the Sec- 
retary and to the taxpayer with respect to any health plan pro- 
vided through the Exchange: 

"(A) The level of coverage described in section 1302(d) 
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the 
period such coverage was in effect. 

"(B) The total premium for the coverage without re- 
gard to the credit under this section or cost-sharing reduc- 
tions under section 1402 of such Act. 

"(C) The aggregate amount of any advance payment of 
such credit or reductions under section 1412 of such Act. 

"(D) The name, address, and TIN of the primary in- 
sured and the name and TIN of each other individual ob- 
taining coverage under the policy. 

"(E) Any information provided to the Exchange, in- 
cluding any change of circumstances, necessary to deter- 
mine eligibility for, and the amount of, such credit. 

"(F) Information necessary to determine whether a 
taxpayer has received excess advance payments. 

If the amount of any increase under clause (i) is not 
a multiple of $50, such increase shall be rounded to 
the next lowest multiple of $50. 
"(g) Regulations. — The Secretary shall prescribe such regula- 
tions as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this sec- 
tion, including regulations which provide for — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1401 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



118 



"(1) the coordination of the credit allowed under this sec- 
tion with the program for advance payment of the credit under 
section 1412 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 
and 

"(2) the application of subsection (f) where the filing status 
of the taxpayer for a taxable year is different from such status 
used for determining the advance payment of the credit.". 

(b) Disallowance of Deduction. — Section 280C of the Inter- 
nal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new subsection: 

"(g) Credit for Health Insurance Premiums. — No deduction 
shall be allowed for the portion of the premiums paid by the tax- 
payer for coverage of 1 or more individuals under a qualified health 
plan which is equal to the amount of the credit determined for the 
taxable year under section 36B(a) with respect to such premiums.". 

(c) Study on Affordable Coverage. — 

(1) Study and report. — 

(A) In general. — Not later than 5 years after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall 
conduct a study on the affordability of health insurance 
coverage, including — 

(i) the impact of the tax credit for qualified health 
insurance coverage of individuals under section 36B of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and the tax credit 
for employee health insurance expenses of small em- 
ployers under section 45R of such Code on maintain- 
ing and expanding the health insurance coverage of in- 
dividuals; 

(ii) the availability of affordable health benefits 
plans, including a study of whether the percentage of 
household income used for purposes of section 
36B(c)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as 
added by this section) is the appropriate level for de- 
termining whether employer-provided coverage is af- 
fordable for an employee and whether such level may 
be lowered without significantly increasing the costs to 
the Federal Government and reducing employer-pro- 
vided coverage; and 

(iii) the ability of individuals to maintain essential 
health benefits coverage (as defined in section 
5000A(f) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986). 

(B) Report. — The Comptroller General shall submit to 
the appropriate committees of Congress a report on the 
study conducted under subparagraph (A), together with 
legislative recommendations relating to the matters stud- 
ied under such subparagraph. 

(2) Appropriate committees of congress. — In this sub- 
section, the term "appropriate committees of Congress" means 
the Committee on Ways and Means, the Committee on Edu- 
cation and Labor, and the Committee on Energy and Com- 
merce of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
Finance and the Committee on Health, Education, Labor and 
Pensions of the Senate. 

(d) Conforming Amendments. — 

June 9, 2010 



119 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1402 



(1) Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United 
States Code, is amended by inserting "36B," after "36A,". 

(2) The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of sub- 
chapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 36A 
the following new item: 

"Sec. 36B. Refundable credit for coverage under a qualified health plan.". 

(3) [As revised by section 10105(dJ\ Section 6211(b)(4)(A) 
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting 
"36B," after "36A,". 

(e) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to taxable years ending after December 31, 2013. 

SEC. 1402 [42 U.S.C. 18071]. REDUCED COST-SHARING FOR INDD7ID- 
UALS ENROLLING IN QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS. 

(a) In General. — In the case of an eligible insured enrolled in 
a qualified health plan — 

(1) the Secretary shall notify the issuer of the plan of such 
eligibility; and 

(2) the issuer shall reduce the cost-sharing under the plan 
at the level and in the manner specified in subsection (c). 

(b) Eligible Insured. — In this section, the term "eligible in- 
sured" means an individual — 

(1) who enrolls in a qualified health plan in the silver level 
of coverage in the individual market offered through an Ex- 
change; and 

(2) whose household income exceeds 100 percent but does 
not exceed 400 percent of the poverty line for a family of the 
size involved. 

In the case of an individual described in section 36B(c)(l)(B) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, the individual shall be treated as 
having household income equal to 100 percent for purposes of ap- 
plying this section. 

(c) Determination of Reduction in Cost-sharing. — 

(1) Reduction in out-of-pocket limit. — 

(A) In general. — The reduction in cost-sharing under 
this subsection shall first be achieved by reducing the ap- 
plicable out-of pocket limit under section 1302(c)(1) in the 
case of — 

(i) an eligible insured whose household income is 
more than 100 percent but not more than 200 percent 
of the poverty line for a family of the size involved, by 
two-thirds; 

(ii) an eligible insured whose household income is 
more than 200 percent but not more than 300 percent 
of the poverty line for a family of the size involved, by 
one-half; and 

(iii) an eligible insured whose household income is 
more than 300 percent but not more than 400 percent 
of the poverty line for a family of the size involved, by 
one-third. 

(B) Coordination with actuarial value limits. — 

(i) In general. — The Secretary shall ensure the 
reduction under this paragraph shall not result in an 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1402 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



120 



increase in the plan's share of the total allowed costs 
of benefits provided under the plan above — 

(I) 94 percent in the case of an eligible in- 
sured described in paragraph (2)(A); [As revised 
by section 1001(b)(1)(A) of HCERA] 

(II) 87 percent in the case of an eligible in- 
sured described in paragraph (2)(B); 

[section 1001(a)(1)(C) of HCERA struck subclause (III) and in- 
serted new subclauses (III) and (IV)~\ 

(III) 73 percent in the case of an eligible in- 
sured whose household income is more than 200 
percent but not more than 250 percent of the pov- 
erty line for a family of the size involved; and 

(IV) 70 percent in the case of an eligible in- 
sured whose household income is more than 250 
percent but not more than 400 percent of the pov- 
erty line for a family of the size involved. 

(ii) Adjustment. — The Secretary shall adjust the 
out-of pocket limits under paragraph (1) if necessary 
to ensure that such limits do not cause the respective 
actuarial values to exceed the levels specified in clause 
(i). 

(2) Additional reduction for lower income in- 
sureds. — The Secretary shall establish procedures under 
which the issuer of a qualified health plan to which this sec- 
tion applies shall further reduce cost-sharing under the plan in 
a manner sufficient to — 

(A) in the case of an eligible insured whose household 
income is not less than 100 percent but not more than 150 
percent of the poverty line for a family of the size involved, 
increase the plan's share of the total allowed costs of bene- 
fits provided under the plan to 94 percent of such costs; 
[As revised by section 1001(a)(2)(A) of HCERA] 

(B) in the case of an eligible insured whose household 
income is more than 150 percent but not more than 200 
percent of the poverty line for a family of the size involved, 
increase the plan's share of the total allowed costs of bene- 
fits provided under the plan to 87 percent of such costs; 
and [As revised by section 1001(a)(2)(B) of HCERA] 

(C) in the case of an eligible insured whose household 
income is more than 200 percent but not more than 250 
percent of the poverty line for a family of the size involved, 
increase the plan's share of the total allowed costs of bene- 
fits provided under the plan to 73 percent of such costs. 
[As added by section 1001(a)(2)(C) of HCERA] 

(3) Methods for reducing cost-sharing. — 

(A) In general. — An issuer of a qualified health plan 
making reductions under this subsection shall notify the 
Secretary of such reductions and the Secretary shall make 
periodic and timely payments to the issuer equal to the 
value of the reductions. 

(B) Capitated payments. — The Secretary may estab- 
lish a capitated payment system to carry out the payment 
of cost-sharing reductions under this section. Any such sys- 

June 9, 2010 



121 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1402 



tern shall take into account the value of the reductions and 
make appropriate risk adjustments to such payments. 

(4) Additional benefits. — If a qualified health plan under 
section 1302(b)(5) offers benefits in addition to the essential 
health benefits required to be provided by the plan, or a State 
requires a qualified health plan under section 1311(d)(3)(B) to 
cover benefits in addition to the essential health benefits re- 
quired to be provided by the plan, the reductions in cost-shar- 
ing under this section shall not apply to such additional bene- 
fits. 

(5) Special rule for pediatric dental plans. — If an in- 
dividual enrolls in both a qualified health plan and a plan de- 
scribed in section 1311(d)(2)(B)(ii)(I) for any plan year, sub- 
section (a) shall not apply to that portion of any reduction in 
cost-sharing under subsection (c) that (under regulations pre- 
scribed by the Secretary) is properly allocable to pediatric den- 
tal benefits which are included in the essential health benefits 
required to be provided by a qualified health plan under sec- 
tion 1302(bXl)(J). 

(d) Special Rules for Indians. — 

(1) Indians under 300 percent of poverty. — If an indi- 
vidual enrolled in any qualified health plan in the individual 
market through an Exchange is an Indian (as defined in sec- 
tion 4(d) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education As- 
sistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450b(d))) whose household income is 
not more than 300 percent of the poverty line for a family of 
the size involved, then, for purposes of this section — 

(A) such individual shall be treated as an eligible in- 
sured; and 

(B) the issuer of the plan shall eliminate any cost- 
sharing under the plan. 

(2) Items or services furnished through Indian 
health providers. — If an Indian (as so defined) enrolled in a 
qualified health plan is furnished an item or service directly by 
the Indian Health Service, an Indian Tribe, Tribal Organiza- 
tion, or Urban Indian Organization or through referral under 
contract health services — 

(A) no cost-sharing under the plan shall be imposed 
under the plan for such item or service; and 

(B) the issuer of the plan shall not reduce the payment 
to any such entity for such item or service by the amount 
of any cost-sharing that would be due from the Indian but 
for subparagraph (A). 

(3) Payment. — The Secretary shall pay to the issuer of a 
qualified health plan the amount necessary to reflect the in- 
crease in actuarial value of the plan required by reason of this 
subsection. 

(e) Rules for Individuals Not Lawfully Present. — 

(1) In general. — If an individual who is an eligible in- 
sured is not lawfully present — 

(A) no cost-sharing reduction under this section shall 
apply with respect to the individual; and 

(B) for purposes of applying this section, the deter- 
mination as to what percentage a taxpayer's household in- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1402 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



122 



come bears to the poverty level for a family of the size in- 
volved shall be made under one of the following methods: 

(i) A method under which — 

(I) the taxpayer's family size is determined by 
not taking such individuals into account, and 

(II) the taxpayer's household income is equal 
to the product of the taxpayer's household income 
(determined without regard to this subsection) 
and a fraction — 

(aa) the numerator of which is the pov- 
erty line for the taxpayer's family size deter- 
mined after application of subclause (I), and 

(bb) the denominator of which is the pov- 
erty line for the taxpayer's family size deter- 
mined without regard to subclause (I). 

(ii) A comparable method reaching the same result 
as the method under clause (i). 

(2) Lawfully present. — For purposes of this section, an 
individual shall be treated as lawfully present only if the indi- 
vidual is, and is reasonably expected to be for the entire period 
of enrollment for which the cost-sharing reduction under this 
section is being claimed, a citizen or national of the United 
States or an alien lawfully present in the United States. 

(3) Secretarial authority. — The Secretary, in consulta- 
tion with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall prescribe rules 
setting forth the methods by which calculations of family size 
and household income are made for purposes of this sub- 
section. Such rules shall be designed to ensure that the least 
burden is placed on individuals enrolling in qualified health 
plans through an Exchange and taxpayers eligible for the cred- 
it allowable under this section. 

(f) Definitions and Special Rules. — In this section: 

(1) In general. — Any term used in this section which is 
also used in section 36B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
shall have the meaning given such term by such section. 

(2) Limitations on reduction. — No cost-sharing reduction 
shall be allowed under this section with respect to coverage for 
any month unless the month is a coverage month with respect 
to which a credit is allowed to the insured (or an applicable 
taxpayer on behalf of the insured) under section 36B of such 
Code. 

(3) Data used for eligibility. — Any determination under 
this section shall be made on the basis of the taxable year for 
which the advance determination is made under section 1412 
and not the taxable year for which the credit under section 
36B of such Code is allowed. 



123 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1411 



Subpart B — Eligibility Determinations 

SEC. 1411 [42 U.S.C. 18081]. PROCEDURES FOR DETERMINING ELIGI- 
BILITY FOR EXCHANGE PARTICIPATION, PREMIUM TAX 
CREDITS AND REDUCED COST-SHARING, AND INDD7IDUAL 
RESPONSIBILITY EXEMPTIONS. 

(a) Establishment of Program. — The Secretary shall estab- 
lish a program meeting the requirements of this section for deter- 
mining — 

(1) whether an individual who is to be covered in the indi- 
vidual market by a qualified health plan offered through an 
Exchange, or who is claiming a premium tax credit or reduced 
cost-sharing, meets the requirements of sections 1312(f)(3), 
1402(e), and 1412(d) of this title and section 36B(e) of the In- 
ternal Revenue Code of 1986 that the individual be a citizen 
or national of the United States or an alien lawfully present 
in the United States; 

(2) in the case of an individual claiming a premium tax 
credit or reduced cost-sharing under section 36B of such Code 
or section 1402 — 

(A) whether the individual meets the income and cov- 
erage requirements of such sections; and 

(B) the amount of the tax credit or reduced cost-shar- 
ing; 

(3) whether an individual's coverage under an employer- 
sponsored health benefits plan is treated as unaffordable under 
sections 36B(c)(2)(C) and 5000A(e)(2); and 

(4) whether to grant a certification under section 
1311(d)(4)(H) attesting that, for purposes of the individual re- 
sponsibility requirement under section 5000A of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986, an individual is entitled to an exemp- 
tion from either the individual responsibility requirement or 
the penalty imposed by such section. 

(b) Information Required To Be Provided by Applicants. — 

(1) In GENERAL. — An applicant for enrollment in a quali- 
fied health plan offered through an Exchange in the individual 
market shall provide — 

(A) the name, address, and date of birth of each indi- 
vidual who is to be covered by the plan (in this subsection 
referred to as an "enrollee"); and 

(B) the information required by any of the following 
paragraphs that is applicable to an enrollee. 

(2) Citizenship or immigration status. — The following 
information shall be provided with respect to every enrollee: 

(A) In the case of an enrollee whose eligibility is based 
on an attestation of citizenship of the enrollee, the enroll- 
ee's social security number. 

(B) In the case of an individual whose eligibility is 
based on an attestation of the enrollee's immigration sta- 
tus, the enrollee's social security number (if applicable) 
and such identifying information with respect to the en- 
rollee's immigration status as the Secretary, after con- 
sultation with the Secretary of Homeland Security, deter- 
mines appropriate. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1411 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



124 



(3) Eligibility and amount of tax credit or reduced 
cost-sharing. — In the case of an enrollee with respect to 
whom a premium tax credit or reduced cost-sharing under sec- 
tion 36B of such Code or section 1402 is being claimed, the fol- 
lowing information: 

(A) Information regarding income and family 
size. — The information described in section 6103(1)(21) for 
the taxable year ending with or within the second calendar 
year preceding the calendar year in which the plan year 
begins. 

(B) Changes in circumstances. — The information de- 
scribed in section 1412(b)(2), including information with 
respect to individuals who were not required to file an in- 
come tax return for the taxable year described in subpara- 
graph (A) or individuals who experienced changes in mar- 
ital status or family size or significant reductions in in- 
come. 

(4) Employer-sponsored coverage. — In the case of an 
enrollee with respect to whom eligibility for a premium tax 
credit under section 36B of such Code or cost-sharing reduction 
under section 1402 is being established on the basis that the 
enrollee's (or related individual's) employer is not treated 
under section 36B(c)(2)(C) of such Code as providing minimum 
essential coverage or affordable minimum essential coverage, 
the following information: 

(A) The name, address, and employer identification 
number (if available) of the employer. 

(B) Whether the enrollee or individual is a full-time 
employee and whether the employer provides such min- 
imum essential coverage. 

(C) If the employer provides such minimum essential 
coverage, the lowest cost option for the enrollee's or indi- 
vidual's enrollment status and the enrollee's or individual's 
required contribution (within the meaning of section 
5000A(e)(l)(B) of such Code) under the employer-sponsored 
plan. 

(D) If an enrollee claims an employer's minimum es- 
sential coverage is unaffordable, the information described 
in paragraph (3). 

If an enrollee changes employment or obtains additional em- 
ployment while enrolled in a qualified health plan for which 
such credit or reduction is allowed, the enrollee shall notify the 
Exchange of such change or additional employment and pro- 
vide the information described in this paragraph with respect 
to the new employer. 

(5) Exemptions from individual responsibility require- 
ments. — In the case of an individual who is seeking an exemp- 
tion certificate under section 1311(d)(4)(H) from any require- 
ment or penalty imposed by section 5000A, the following infor- 
mation: 

(A) In the case of an individual seeking exemption 
based on the individual's status as a member of an exempt 
religious sect or division, as a member of a health care 
sharing ministry, as an Indian, or as an individual eligible 

June 9, 2010 



125 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1411 



for a hardship exemption, such information as the Sec- 
retary shall prescribe. 

(B) In the case of an individual seeking exemption 
based on the lack of affordable coverage or the individual's 
status as a taxpayer with household income less than 100 
percent of the poverty line, the information described in 
paragraphs (3) and (4), as applicable. 

(c) Verification of Information Contained in Records of 
Specific Federal Officials. — 

(1) Information transferred to secretary. — An Ex- 
change shall submit the information provided by an applicant 
under subsection (b) to the Secretary for verification in accord- 
ance with the requirements of this subsection and subsection 

(d) . 

(2) Citizenship or immigration status. — 

(A) Commissioner of social security. — The Sec- 
retary shall submit to the Commissioner of Social Security 
the following information for a determination as to wheth- 
er the information provided is consistent with the informa- 
tion in the records of the Commissioner: 

(i) The name, date of birth, and social security 
number of each individual for whom such information 
was provided under subsection (b)(2). 

(ii) The attestation of an individual that the indi- 
vidual is a citizen. 

(B) Secretary of homeland security. — 

(i) In general. — In the case of an individual — 

(I) who attests that the individual is an alien 
lawfully present in the United States; or 

(II) who attests that the individual is a citizen 
but with respect to whom the Commissioner of So- 
cial Security has notified the Secretary under sub- 
section (e)(3) that the attestation is inconsistent 
with information in the records maintained by the 
Commissioner; 

the Secretary shall submit to the Secretary of Home- 
land Security the information described in clause (ii) 
for a determination as to whether the information pro- 
vided is consistent with the information in the records 
of the Secretary of Homeland Security. 

(ii) Information. — The information described in 
clause (ii) is the following: 

(I) The name, date of birth, and any identi- 
fying information with respect to the individual's 
immigration status provided under subsection 
(b)(2). 

(II) The attestation that the individual is an 
alien lawfully present in the United States or in 
the case of an individual described in clause (i)(II), 
the attestation that the individual is a citizen. 

(3) Eligibility for tax credit and cost-sharing reduc- 
tion. — The Secretary shall submit the information described in 
subsection (b)(3)(A) provided under paragraph (3), (4), or (5) of 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1411 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



126 



subsection (b) to the Secretary of the Treasury for verification 
of household income and family size for purposes of eligibility. 
(4) Methods — 

(A) In general. — The Secretary, in consultation with 
the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Homeland 
Security, and the Commissioner of Social Security, shall 
provide that verifications and determinations under this 
subsection shall be done — 

(i) through use of an on-line system or otherwise 
for the electronic submission of, and response to, the 
information submitted under this subsection with re- 
spect to an applicant; or 

(ii) by determining the consistency of the informa- 
tion submitted with the information maintained in the 
records of the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary 
of Homeland Security, or the Commissioner of Social 
Security through such other method as is approved by 
the Secretary. 

(B) Flexibility. — The Secretary may modify the meth- 
ods used under the program established by this section for 
the Exchange and verification of information if the Sec- 
retary determines such modifications would reduce the ad- 
ministrative costs and burdens on the applicant, including 
allowing an applicant to request the Secretary of the 
Treasury to provide the information described in para- 
graph (3) directly to the Exchange or to the Secretary. The 
Secretary shall not make any such modification unless the 
Secretary determines that any applicable requirements 
under this section and section 6103 of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986 with respect to the confidentiality, dis- 
closure, maintenance, or use of information will be met. 

(d) Verification by Secretary. — In the case of information 
provided under subsection (b) that is not required under subsection 
(c) to be submitted to another person for verification, the Secretary 
shall verify the accuracy of such information in such manner as the 
Secretary determines appropriate, including delegating responsi- 
bility for verification to the Exchange. 

(e) Actions Relating to Verification. — 

(1) In general. — Each person to whom the Secretary pro- 
vided information under subsection (c) shall report to the Sec- 
retary under the method established under subsection (c)(4) 
the results of its verification and the Secretary shall notify the 
Exchange of such results. Each person to whom the Secretary 
provided information under subsection (d) shall report to the 
Secretary in such manner as the Secretary determines appro- 
priate. 

(2) Verification. — 

(A) Eligibility for enrollment and premium tax 
credits and cost-sharing reductions. — If information 
provided by an applicant under paragraphs (1), (2), (3), 
and (4) of subsection (b) is verified under subsections (c) 
and (d)— 

June 9, 2010 



127 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1411 



(i) the individual's eligibility to enroll through the 
Exchange and to apply for premium tax credits and 
cost-sharing reductions shall be satisfied; and 

(ii) the Secretary shall, if applicable, notify the 
Secretary of the Treasury under section 1412(c) of the 
amount of any advance payment to be made. 

(B) Exemption from individual responsibility. — If 
information provided by an applicant under subsection 
(b)(5) is verified under subsections (c) and (d), the Sec- 
retary shall issue the certification of exemption described 
in section 1311(d)(4)(H). 

(3) Inconsistencies involving attestation of citizen- 
ship OR LAWFUL PRESENCE. — If the information provided by 
any applicant under subsection (b)(2) is inconsistent with infor- 
mation in the records maintained by the Commissioner of So- 
cial Security or Secretary of Homeland Security, whichever is 
applicable, the applicant's eligibility will be determined in the 
same manner as an individual's eligibility under the medicaid 
program is determined under section 1902(ee) of the Social Se- 
curity Act (as in effect on January 1, 2010). 

(4) Inconsistencies involving other information. — 

(A) In general. — If the information provided by an 
applicant under subsection (b) (other than subsection 
(b)(2)) is inconsistent with information in the records 
maintained by persons under subsection (c) or is not 
verified under subsection (d), the Secretary shall notify the 
Exchange and the Exchange shall take the following ac- 
tions: 

(i) Reasonable effort. — The Exchange shall 
make a reasonable effort to identify and address the 
causes of such inconsistency, including through typo- 
graphical or other clerical errors, by contacting the ap- 
plicant to confirm the accuracy of the information, and 
by taking such additional actions as the Secretary, 
through regulation or other guidance, may identify. 

(ii) Notice and opportunity to correct. — In the 
case the inconsistency or inability to verify is not re- 
solved under subparagraph (A), the Exchange shall — 

(I) notify the applicant of such fact; 

(II) provide the applicant an opportunity to ei- 
ther present satisfactory documentary evidence or 
resolve the inconsistency with the person verifying 
the information under subsection (c) or (d) during 
the 90-day period beginning the date on which the 
notice required under subclause (I) is sent to the 
applicant. 

The Secretary may extend the 90-day period under 
subclause (II) for enrollments occurring during 2014. 

(B) Specific actions not involving citizenship or 

LAWFUL PRESENCE. — 

(i) In general. — Except as provided in paragraph 
(3), the Exchange shall, during any period before the 
close of the period under subparagraph (A)(ii)(II), 
make any determination under paragraphs (2), (3), 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1411 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



128 



and (4) of subsection (a) on the basis of the informa- 
tion contained on the application. 

(ii) Eligibility or amount of credit or reduc- 
tion. — If an inconsistency involving the eligibility for, 
or amount of, any premium tax credit or cost-sharing 
reduction is unresolved under this subsection as of the 
close of the period under subparagraph (A)(ii)(II), the 
Exchange shall notify the applicant of the amount (if 
any) of the credit or reduction that is determined on 
the basis of the records maintained by persons under 
subsection (c). 

(iii) Employer affordability. — If the Secretary 
notifies an Exchange that an enrollee is eligible for a 
premium tax credit under section 36B of such Code or 
cost-sharing reduction under section 1402 because the 
enrollee's (or related individual's) employer does not 
provide minimum essential coverage through an em- 
ployer-sponsored plan or that the employer does pro- 
vide that coverage but it is not affordable coverage, 
the Exchange shall notify the employer of such fact 
and that the employer may be liable for the payment 
assessed under section 4980H of such Code. 

(iv) Exemption. — In any case where the inconsist- 
ency involving, or inability to verify, information pro- 
vided under subsection (b)(5) is not resolved as of the 
close of the period under subparagraph (A)(ii)(II), the 
Exchange shall notify an applicant that no certifi- 
cation of exemption from any requirement or payment 
under section 5000A of such Code will be issued. 

(C) Appeals process. — The Exchange shall also notify 
each person receiving notice under this paragraph of the 
appeals processes established under subsection (f). 
(f) Appeals and Redeterminations. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary, in consultation with the 
Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Homeland Security, 
and the Commissioner of Social Security, shall establish proce- 
dures by which the Secretary or one of such other Federal offi- 
cers — 

(A) hears and makes decisions with respect to appeals 
of any determination under subsection (e); and 

(B) redetermines eligibility on a periodic basis in ap- 
propriate circumstances. 

(2) Employer liability. — 

(A) In general. — The Secretary shall establish a sepa- 
rate appeals process for employers who are notified under 
subsection (e)(4)(C) that the employer may be liable for a 
tax imposed by section 4980H of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 with respect to an employee because of a de- 
termination that the employer does not provide minimum 
essential coverage through an employer-sponsored plan or 
that the employer does provide that coverage but it is not 
affordable coverage with respect to an employee. Such 
process shall provide an employer the opportunity to — 

June 9, 2010 



129 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1411 



(i) present information to the Exchange for review 
of the determination either by the Exchange or the 
person making the determination, including evidence 
of the employer-sponsored plan and employer contribu- 
tions to the plan; and 

(ii) have access to the data used to make the de- 
termination to the extent allowable by law. 

Such process shall be in addition to any rights of appeal 
the employer may have under subtitle F of such Code. 

(B) Confidentiality. — Notwithstanding any provision 
of this title (or the amendments made by this title) or sec- 
tion 6103 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, an em- 
ployer shall not be entitled to any taxpayer return infor- 
mation with respect to an employee for purposes of deter- 
mining whether the employer is subject to the penalty 
under section 4980H of such Code with respect to the em- 
ployee, except that — 

(i) the employer may be notified as to the name of 
an employee and whether or not the employee's in- 
come is above or below the threshold by which the af- 
fordability of an employer's health insurance coverage 
is measured; and 

(ii) this subparagraph shall not apply to an em- 
ployee who provides a waiver (at such time and in 
such manner as the Secretary may prescribe) author- 
izing an employer to have access to the employee's tax- 
payer return information. 

(g) Confidentiality of Applicant Information. — 

(1) In general. — An applicant for insurance coverage or 
for a premium tax credit or cost-sharing reduction shall be re- 
quired to provide only the information strictly necessary to au- 
thenticate identity, determine eligibility, and determine the 
amount of the credit or reduction. 

(2) Receipt of information. — Any person who receives 
information provided by an applicant under subsection (b) 
(whether directly or by another person at the request of the ap- 
plicant), or receives information from a Federal agency under 
subsection (c), (d), or (e), shall — 

(A) use the information only for the purposes of, and 
to the extent necessary in, ensuring the efficient operation 
of the Exchange, including verifying the eligibility of an in- 
dividual to enroll through an Exchange or to claim a pre- 
mium tax credit or cost-sharing reduction or the amount 
of the credit or reduction; and 

(B) not disclose the information to any other person 
except as provided in this section. 

(h) Penalties. — 

(1) False or fraudulent information. — 
(A) Civil penalty. — 
(i) In general. — If— 

(I) any person fails to provides correct infor- 
mation under subsection (b); and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1411 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



130 



(II) such failure is attributable to negligence 
or disregard of any rules or regulations of the Sec- 
retary, 

such person shall be subject, in addition to any other 
penalties that may be prescribed by law, to a civil pen- 
alty of not more than $25,000 with respect to any fail- 
ures involving an application for a plan year. For pur- 
poses of this subparagraph, the terms "negligence" and 
"disregard" shall have the same meanings as when 
used in section 6662 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986. 

(ii) Reasonable cause exception. — No penalty 
shall be imposed under clause (i) if the Secretary de- 
termines that there was a reasonable cause for the 
failure and that the person acted in good faith. 
(B) Knowing and willful violations. — Any person 
who knowingly and willfully provides false or fraudulent 
information under subsection (b) shall be subject, in addi- 
tion to any other penalties that may be prescribed by law, 
to a civil penalty of not more than $250,000. 

(2) Improper use or disclosure of information. — Any 
person who knowingly and willfully uses or discloses informa- 
tion in violation of subsection (g) shall be subject, in addition 
to any other penalties that may be prescribed by law, to a civil 
penalty of not more than $25,000. 

(3) Limitations on liens and levies. — The Secretary (or, 
if applicable, the Attorney General of the United States) shall 
not — 

(A) file notice of lien with respect to any property of 
a person by reason of any failure to pay the penalty im- 
posed by this subsection; or 

(B) levy on any such property with respect to such fail- 
ure. 

(i) Study of Administration of Employer Responsibility. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services shall, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treas- 
ury, conduct a study of the procedures that are necessary to 
ensure that in the administration of this title and section 
4980H of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by sec- 
tion 1513) that the following rights are protected: 

(A) The rights of employees to preserve their right to 
confidentiality of their taxpayer return information and 
their right to enroll in a qualified health plan through an 
Exchange if an employer does not provide affordable cov- 
erage. 

(B) The rights of employers to adequate due process 
and access to information necessary to accurately deter- 
mine any payment assessed on employers. 

(2) Report. — Not later than January 1, 2013, the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services shall report the results 
of the study conducted under paragraph (1), including any rec- 
ommendations for legislative changes, to the Committees on 
Finance and Health, Education, Labor and Pensions of the 

June 9, 2010 



131 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1412 



Senate and the Committees of Education and Labor and Ways 
and Means of the House of Representatives. 

SEC. 1412 [42 U.S.C. 18082]. ADVANCE DETERMINATION AND PAYMENT 
OF PREMIUM TAX CREDITS AND COST-SHARING REDUC- 
TIONS. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary, in consultation with the Sec- 
retary of the Treasury, shall establish a program under which — 

(1) upon request of an Exchange, advance determinations 
are made under section 1411 with respect to the income eligi- 
bility of individuals enrolling in a qualified health plan in the 
individual market through the Exchange for the premium tax 
credit allowable under section 36B of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 and the cost-sharing reductions under section 
1402; 

(2) the Secretary notifies — 

(A) the Exchange and the Secretary of the Treasury of 
the advance determinations; and 

(B) the Secretary of the Treasury of the name and em- 
ployer identification number of each employer with respect 
to whom 1 or more employee of the employer were deter- 
mined to be eligible for the premium tax credit under sec- 
tion 36B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and the 
cost-sharing reductions under section 1402 because — 

(i) the employer did not provide minimum essen- 
tial coverage; or 

(ii) the employer provided such minimum essen- 
tial coverage but it was determined under section 
36B(c)(2)(C) of such Code to either be unaffordable to 
the employee or not provide the required minimum ac- 
tuarial value; and 

(3) the Secretary of the Treasury makes advance payments 
of such credit or reductions to the issuers of the qualified 
health plans in order to reduce the premiums payable by indi- 
viduals eligible for such credit. 

(b) Advance Determinations. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary shall provide under the 
program established under subsection (a) that advance deter- 
mination of eligibility with respect to any individual shall be 
made — 

(A) during the annual open enrollment period applica- 
ble to the individual (or such other enrollment period as 
may be specified by the Secretary); and 

(B) on the basis of the individual's household income 
for the most recent taxable year for which the Secretary, 
after consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, de- 
termines information is available. 

(2) Changes in circumstances. — The Secretary shall pro- 
vide procedures for making advance determinations on the 
basis of information other than that described in paragraph 
(1)(B) in cases where information included with an application 
form demonstrates substantial changes in income, changes in 
family size or other household circumstances, change in filing 
status, the filing of an application for unemployment benefits, 
or other significant changes affecting eligibility, including — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1412 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



132 



(A) allowing an individual claiming a decrease of 20 
percent or more in income, or filing an application for un- 
employment benefits, to have eligibility for the credit de- 
termined on the basis of household income for a later pe- 
riod or on the basis of the individual's estimate of such in- 
come for the taxable year; and 

(B) the determination of household income in cases 
where the taxpayer was not required to file a return of tax 
imposed by this chapter for the second preceding taxable 
year. 

(c) Payment of Premium Tax Credits and Cost-sharing Re- 
ductions. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary shall notify the Secretary 
of the Treasury and the Exchange through which the indi- 
vidual is enrolling of the advance determination under section 
1411. 

(2) Premium tax credit. — 

(A) In general. — The Secretary of the Treasury shall 
make the advance payment under this section of any pre- 
mium tax credit allowed under section 36B of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 to the issuer of a qualified health 
plan on a monthly basis (or such other periodic basis as 
the Secretary may provide). 

(B) Issuer responsibilities. — An issuer of a qualified 
health plan receiving an advance payment with respect to 
an individual enrolled in the plan shall — 

(i) reduce the premium charged the insured for 
any period by the amount of the advance payment for 
the period; 

(ii) notify the Exchange and the Secretary of such 
reduction; 

(iii) include with each billing statement the 
amount by which the premium for the plan has been 
reduced by reason of the advance payment; and 

(iv) in the case of any nonpayment of premiums by 
the insured — 

(I) notify the Secretary of such nonpayment; 

and 

(II) allow a 3-month grace period for non- 
payment of premiums before discontinuing cov- 
erage. 

(3) Cost-sharing reductions. — The Secretary shall also 
notify the Secretary of the Treasury and the Exchange under 
paragraph (1) if an advance payment of the cost-sharing reduc- 
tions under section 1402 is to be made to the issuer of any 
qualified health plan with respect to any individual enrolled in 
the plan. The Secretary of the Treasury shall make such ad- 
vance payment at such time and in such amount as the Sec- 
retary specifies in the notice. 

(d) No Federal Payments for Individuals Not Lawfully 
Present. — Nothing in this subtitle or the amendments made by 
this subtitle allows Federal payments, credits, or cost-sharing re- 
ductions for individuals who are not lawfully present in the United 
States. 

June 9, 2010 



133 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1413 



(e) State Flexibility. — Nothing in this subtitle or the amend- 
ments made by this subtitle shall be construed to prohibit a State 
from making payments to or on behalf of an individual for coverage 
under a qualified health plan offered through an Exchange that are 
in addition to any credits or cost-sharing reductions allowable to 
the individual under this subtitle and such amendments. 

SEC. 1413 [42 U.S.C. 18083]. STREAMLINING OF PROCEDURES FOR EN- 
ROLLMENT THROUGH AN EXCHANGE AND STATE MED- 
ICAID, CHIP, AND HEALTH SUBSIDY PROGRAMS. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary shall establish a system meet- 
ing the requirements of this section under which residents of each 
State may apply for enrollment in, receive a determination of eligi- 
bility for participation in, and continue participation in, applicable 
State health subsidy programs. Such system shall ensure that if an 
individual applying to an Exchange is found through screening to 
be eligible for medical assistance under the State medicaid plan 
under title XIX, or eligible for enrollment under a State children's 
health insurance program (CHIP) under title XXI of such Act, the 
individual is enrolled for assistance under such plan or program. 

(b) Requirements Relating to Forms and Notice. — 

(1) Requirements relating to forms. — 

(A) In general. — The Secretary shall develop and pro- 
vide to each State a single, streamlined form that — 

(i) may be used to apply for all applicable State 
health subsidy programs within the State; 

(ii) may be filed online, in person, by mail, or by 
telephone; 

(iii) may be filed with an Exchange or with State 
officials operating one of the other applicable State 
health subsidy programs; and 

(iv) is structured to maximize an applicant's abil- 
ity to complete the form satisfactorily, taking into ac- 
count the characteristics of individuals who qualify for 
applicable State health subsidy programs. 

(B) State authority to establish form. — A State 
may develop and use its own single, streamlined form as 
an alternative to the form developed under subparagraph 
(A) if the alternative form is consistent with standards 
promulgated by the Secretary under this section. 

(C) Supplemental eligibility forms. — The Secretary 
may allow a State to use a supplemental or alternative 
form in the case of individuals who apply for eligibility 
that is not determined on the basis of the household in- 
come (as defined in section 36B of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986). 

(2) Notice. — The Secretary shall provide that an applicant 
filing a form under paragraph (1) shall receive notice of eligi- 
bility for an applicable State health subsidy program without 
any need to provide additional information or paperwork un- 
less such information or paperwork is specifically required by 
law when information provided on the form is inconsistent 
with data used for the electronic verification under paragraph 
(3) or is otherwise insufficient to determine eligibility. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1413 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



134 



(c) Requirements Relating to Eligibility Based on Data 
Exchanges — 

(1) Development of secure interfaces. — Each State 
shall develop for all applicable State health subsidy programs 
a secure, electronic interface allowing an exchange of data (in- 
cluding information contained in the application forms de- 
scribed in subsection (b)) that allows a determination of eligi- 
bility for all such programs based on a single application. Such 
interface shall be compatible with the method established for 
data verification under section 1411(c)(4). 

(2) Data matching program. — Each applicable State 
health subsidy program shall participate in a data matching 
arrangement for determining eligibility for participation in the 
program under paragraph (3) that — 

(A) provides access to data described in paragraph (3); 

(B) applies only to individuals who — 

(i) receive assistance from an applicable State 
health subsidy program; or 

(ii) apply for such assistance — 

(I) by filing a form described in subsection (b); 

or 

(II) by requesting a determination of eligi- 
bility and authorizing disclosure of the informa- 
tion described in paragraph (3) to applicable State 
health coverage subsidy programs for purposes of 
determining and establishing eligibility; and 

(C) consistent with standards promulgated by the Sec- 
retary, including the privacy and data security safeguards 
described in section 1942 of the Social Security Act or that 
are otherwise applicable to such programs. 

(3) Determination of eligibility. — 

(A) In general. — Each applicable State health sub- 
sidy program shall, to the maximum extent practicable — 

(i) establish, verify, and update eligibility for par- 
ticipation in the program using the data matching ar- 
rangement under paragraph (2); and 

(ii) determine such eligibility on the basis of reli- 
able, third party data, including information described 
in sections 1137, 453(i), and 1942(a) of the Social Se- 
curity Act, obtained through such arrangement. 

(B) Exception. — This paragraph shall not apply in cir- 
cumstances with respect to which the Secretary deter- 
mines that the administrative and other costs of use of the 
data matching arrangement under paragraph (2) outweigh 
its expected gains in accuracy, efficiency, and program par- 
ticipation. 

(4) Secretarial standards. — The Secretary shall, after 
consultation with persons in possession of the data to be 
matched and representatives of applicable State health subsidy 
programs, promulgate standards governing the timing, con- 
tents, and procedures for data matching described in this sub- 
section. Such standards shall take into account administrative 
and other costs and the value of data matching to the estab- 

June 9, 2010 



135 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1414 



lishment, verification, and updating of eligibility for applicable 
State health subsidy programs. 

(d) Administrative Authority. — 

(1) Agreements. — Subject to section 1411 and section 
6103(1)(21) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and any other 
requirement providing safeguards of privacy and data integ- 
rity, the Secretary may establish model agreements, and enter 
into agreements, for the sharing of data under this section. 

(2) Authority of exchange to contract out. — Nothing 
in this section shall be construed to — 

(A) prohibit contractual arrangements through which 
a State medicaid agency determines eligibility for all appli- 
cable State health subsidy programs, but only if such 
agency complies with the Secretary's requirements ensur- 
ing reduced administrative costs, eligibility errors, and dis- 
ruptions in coverage; or 

(B) change any requirement under title XIX that eligi- 
bility for participation in a State's medicaid program must 
be determined by a public agency. 

(e) Applicable State Health Subsidy Program. — In this sec- 
tion, the term "applicable State health subsidy program" means — 

(1) the program under this title for the enrollment in 
qualified health plans offered through an Exchange, including 
the premium tax credits under section 36B of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986 and cost-sharing reductions under section 
1402; 

(2) a State medicaid program under title XIX of the Social 
Security Act; 

(3) a State children's health insurance program (CHIP) 
under title XXI of such Act; and 

(4) a State program under section 1331 establishing quali- 
fied basic health plans. 

SEC. 1414. DISCLOSURES TO CARRY OUT ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS 
FOR CERTAIN PROGRAMS. 

(a) Disclosure of Taxpayer Return Information and So- 
cial Security Numbers. — 

(1) Taxpayer return information. — Subsection (1) of sec- 
tion 6103 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph: 

"(21) Disclosure of return information to carry out 
eligibility requirements for certain programs. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary, upon written re- 
quest from the Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
shall disclose to officers, employees, and contractors of the 
Department of Health and Human Services return infor- 
mation of any taxpayer whose income is relevant in deter- 
mining any premium tax credit under section 36B or any 
cost-sharing reduction under section 1402 of the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act or eligibility for partici- 
pation in a State medicaid program under title XIX of the 
Social Security Act, a State's children's health insurance 
program under title XXI of the Social Security Act, or a 
basic health program under section 1331 of Patient Protec- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1414 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



136 



tion and Affordable Care Act. Such return information 
shall be limited to — 

"(i) taxpayer identity information with respect to 
such taxpayer, 

"(ii) the filing status of such taxpayer, 
"(hi) the number of individuals for whom a deduc- 
tion is allowed under section 151 with respect to the 
taxpayer (including the taxpayer and the taxpayer's 
spouse), 

"(iv) the modified adjusted gross income (as de- 
fined in section 36B) of such taxpayer and each of the 
other individuals included under clause (iii) who are 
required to file a return of tax imposed by chapter 1 
for the taxable year, [As revised by section 
1004(a)(1)(B) of HCERA] 

"(v) such other information as is prescribed by the 
Secretary by regulation as might indicate whether the 
taxpayer is eligible for such credit or reduction (and 
the amount thereof), and 

"(vi) the taxable year with respect to which the 
preceding information relates or, if applicable, the fact 
that such information is not available. 
"(B) Information to exchange and state agen- 
cies. — The Secretary of Health and Human Services may 
disclose to an Exchange established under the Patient Pro- 
tection and Affordable Care Act or its contractors, or to a 
State agency administering a State program described in 
subparagraph (A) or its contractors, any inconsistency be- 
tween the information provided by the Exchange or State 
agency to the Secretary and the information provided to 
the Secretary under subparagraph (A). 

"(C) Restriction on use of disclosed informa- 
tion. — Return information disclosed under subparagraph 
(A) or (B) may be used by officers, employees, and contrac- 
tors of the Department of Health and Human Services, an 
Exchange, or a State agency only for the purposes of, and 
to the extent necessary in — 

"(i) establishing eligibility for participation in the 
Exchange, and verifying the appropriate amount of, 
any credit or reduction described in subparagraph (A), 
"(ii) determining eligibility for participation in the 
State programs described in subparagraph (A).". 
(2) Social security numbers— Section 205(c)(2)(C) of the 
Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new clause: 

"(x) The Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
and the Exchanges established under section 1311 of 
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, are 
authorized to collect and use the names and social se- 
curity account numbers of individuals as required to 
administer the provisions of, and the amendments 
made by, the such Act.". 

June 9, 2010 



137 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1416 



(b) Confidentiality and Disclosure. — Paragraph (3) of sec- 
tion 6103(a) of such Code is amended by striking "or (20)" and in- 
serting "(20), or (21)". 

(c) Procedures and Recordkeeping Related to Disclo- 
sures. — Paragraph (4) of section 6103(p) of such Code is amend- 
ed— 

(1) by inserting ", or any entity described in subsection 
(1)(21)," after "or (20)" in the matter preceding subparagraph 

(A), 

(2) by inserting "or any entity described in subsection 
(1X21)," after "or (o)(l)(A)" in subparagraph (F)(ii), and 

(3) by inserting "or any entity described in subsection 
(1)(21)," after "or (20)" both places it appears in the matter 
after subparagraph (F). 

(d) Unauthorized Disclosure or Inspection. — Paragraph (2) 
of section 7213(a) of such Code is amended by striking "or (20)" and 
inserting "(20), or (21)". 

SEC. 1415 [42 U.S.C. 18084]. PREMIUM TAX CREDIT AND COST-SHARING 
REDUCTION PAYMENTS DISREGARDED FOR FEDERAL 
AND FEDERALLY-ASSISTED PROGRAMS. 

For purposes of determining the eligibility of any individual for 
benefits or assistance, or the amount or extent of benefits or assist- 
ance, under any Federal program or under any State or local pro- 
gram financed in whole or in part with Federal funds — 

(1) any credit or refund allowed or made to any individual 
by reason of section 36B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
(as added by section 1401) shall not be taken into account as 
income and shall not be taken into account as resources for the 
month of receipt and the following 2 months; and 

(2) any cost-sharing reduction payment or advance pay- 
ment of the credit allowed under such section 36B that is made 
under section 1402 or 1412 shall be treated as made to the 
qualified health plan in which an individual is enrolled and not 
to that individual. 

SEC. 1416. STUDY OF GEOGRAPHIC VARIATION IN APPLICATION OF 
FPL. 

[Section added by section 10105(fJ\ 

(a) In General. — The Secretary shall conduct a study to exam- 
ine the feasibility and implication of adjusting the application of 
the Federal poverty level under this subtitle (and the amendments 
made by this subtitle) for different geographic areas so as to reflect 
the variations in cost-of-living among different areas within the 
United States. If the Secretary determines that an adjustment is 
feasible, the study should include a methodology to make such an 
adjustment. Not later than January 1, 2013, the Secretary shall 
submit to Congress a report on such study and shall include such 
recommendations as the Secretary determines appropriate. 

(b) Inclusion of Territories. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary shall ensure that the 
study under subsection (a) covers the territories of the United 
States and that special attention is paid to the disparity that 
exists among poverty levels and the cost of living in such terri- 
tories and to the impact of such disparity on efforts to expand 
health coverage and ensure health care. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1421 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



138 



(2) Territories defined. — In this subsection, the term 
"territories of the United States" includes the Commonwealth 
of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, the 
Northern Mariana Islands, and any other territory or posses- 
sion of the United States. 

PART II— SMALL BUSINESS TAX CREDIT 

SEC. 1421. CREDIT FOR EMPLOYEE HEALTH INSURANCE EXPENSES OF 
SMALL BUSINESSES. 

(a) In General. — Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of 
chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to busi- 
ness-related credits) is amended by inserting after section 45Q the 
following: 

"SEC. 45R. EMPLOYEE HEALTH INSURANCE EXPENSES OF SMALL EM- 
PLOYERS. 

"(a) General Rule. — For purposes of section 38, in the case of 
an eligible small employer, the small employer health insurance 
credit determined under this section for any taxable year in the 
credit period is the amount determined under subsection (b). 

"(b) Health Insurance Credit Amount. — Subject to sub- 
section (c), the amount determined under this subsection with re- 
spect to any eligible small employer is equal to 50 percent (35 per- 
cent in the case of a tax-exempt eligible small employer) of the less- 
er of — 

"(1) the aggregate amount of nonelective contributions the 
employer made on behalf of its employees during the taxable 
year under the arrangement described in subsection (d)(4) for 
premiums for qualified health plans offered by the employer to 
its employees through an Exchange, or 

"(2) the aggregate amount of nonelective contributions 
which the employer would have made during the taxable year 
under the arrangement if each employee taken into account 
under paragraph (1) had enrolled in a qualified health plan 
which had a premium equal to the average premium (as deter- 
mined by the Secretary of Health and Human Services) for the 
small group market in the rating area in which the employee 
enrolls for coverage. 

"(c) Phaseout of Credit Amount Based on Number of Em- 
ployees and Average Wages. — The amount of the credit deter- 
mined under subsection (b) without regard to this subsection shall 
be reduced (but not below zero) by the sum of the following 
amounts: 

"(1) Such amount multiplied by a fraction the numerator 
of which is the total number of full-time equivalent employees 
of the employer in excess of 10 and the denominator of which 
is 15. 

"(2) Such amount multiplied by a fraction the numerator 
of which is the average annual wages of the employer in excess 
of the dollar amount in effect under subsection (d)(3)(B) and 
the denominator of which is such dollar amount. 
"(d) Eligible Small Employer. — For purposes of this sec- 
tion — 

June 9, 2010 



139 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1421V45R IRC 



"(1) In general. — The term 'eligible small employer' 
means, with respect to any taxable year, an employer — 

"(A) which has no more than 25 full-time equivalent 
employees for the taxable year, 

"(B) the average annual wages of which do not exceed 
an amount equal to twice the dollar amount in effect under 
paragraph (3)(B) for the taxable year, and 

"(C) which has in effect an arrangement described in 
paragraph (4). 

"(2) Full-time equivalent employees. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'full-time equivalent em- 
ployees' means a number of employees equal to the num- 
ber determined by dividing — 

"(i) the total number of hours of service for which 
wages were paid by the employer to employees during 
the taxable year, by 
"(ii) 2,080. 

Such number shall be rounded to the next lowest whole 
number if not otherwise a whole number. 

"(B) Excess hours not counted. — If an employee 
works in excess of 2,080 hours of service during any tax- 
able year, such excess shall not be taken into account 
under subparagraph (A). 

"(C) Hours of service. — The Secretary, in consulta- 
tion with the Secretary of Labor, shall prescribe such regu- 
lations, rules, and guidance as may be necessary to deter- 
mine the hours of service of an employee, including rules 
for the application of this paragraph to employees who are 
not compensated on an hourly basis. 
"(3) Average annual wages. — 

"(A) In general. — The average annual wages of an el- 
igible small employer for any taxable year is the amount 
determined by dividing — 

"(i) the aggregate amount of wages which were 

paid by the employer to employees during the taxable 

year, by 

"(ii) the number of full-time equivalent employees 
of the employee determined under paragraph (2) for 
the taxable year. 
Such amount shall be rounded to the next lowest multiple 
of $1,000 if not otherwise such a multiple. 

"(B) Dollar amount. — [Replaced by section 
10105(e)(l)~\ For purposes of paragraph (1)(B) and sub- 
section (c)(2) — 

"(i) 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013. — The dollar amount 
in effect under this paragraph for taxable years begin- 
ning in 2010, 2011, 2012, or 2013 is $25,000. 

"(ii) Subsequent years. — In the case of a taxable 
year beginning in a calendar year after 2013, the dol- 
lar amount in effect under this paragraph shall be 
equal to $25,000, multiplied by the cost-of-living ad- 
justment under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year, 
determined by substituting 'calendar year 2012' for 
'calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1421\45R IRC 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



140 



"(4) Contribution arrangement. — An arrangement is de- 
scribed in this paragraph if it requires an eligible small em- 
ployer to make a nonelective contribution on behalf of each em- 
ployee who enrolls in a qualified health plan offered to employ- 
ees by the employer through an exchange in an amount equal 
to a uniform percentage (not less than 50 percent) of the pre- 
mium cost of the qualified health plan. 

"(5) Seasonal worker hours and wages not counted. — 
For purposes of this subsection — 

"(A) In general. — The number of hours of service 
worked by, and wages paid to, a seasonal worker of an em- 
ployer shall not be taken into account in determining the 
full-time equivalent employees and average annual wages 
of the employer unless the worker works for the employer 
on more than 120 days during the taxable year. 

"(B) Definition of seasonal worker. — The term 
'seasonal worker' means a worker who performs labor or 
services on a seasonal basis as defined by the Secretary of 
Labor, including workers covered by section 500.20(s)(l) of 
title 29, Code of Federal Regulations and retail workers 
employed exclusively during holiday seasons. 
"(e) Other Rules and Definitions. — For purposes of this sec- 
tion — 

"(1) Employee. — 

"(A) Certain employees excluded. — The term 'em- 
ployee' shall not include — 

"(i) an employee within the meaning of section 

401(c)(1), 

"(ii) any 2-percent shareholder (as defined in sec- 
tion 1372(b)) of an eligible small business which is an 
S corporation, 

"(hi) any 5-percent owner (as defined in section 
416(i)(l)(B)(i)) of an eligible small business, or 

"(iv) any individual who bears any of the relation- 
ships described in subparagraphs (A) through (G) of 
section 152(d)(2) to, or is a dependent described in sec- 
tion 152(d)(2)(H) of, an individual described in clause 
(i), (ii), or (hi). 

"(B) Leased employees. — The term 'employee' shall 
include a leased employee within the meaning of section 
414(n). 

"(2) Credit period. — The term 'credit period' means, with 
respect to any eligible small employer, the 2-consecutive-tax- 
able year period beginning with the 1st taxable year in which 
the employer (or any predecessor) offers 1 or more qualified 
health plans to its employees through an Exchange. 

"(3) Nonelective contribution. — The term 'nonelective 
contribution' means an employer contribution other than an 
employer contribution pursuant to a salary reduction arrange- 
ment. 

"(4) Wages. — The term 'wages' has the meaning given 
such term by section 3121(a) (determined without regard to 
any dollar limitation contained in such section). 

"(5) Aggregation and other rules made applicable. — 

June 9, 2010 



141 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1421V45R IRC 



"(A) Aggregation rules. — All employers treated as a 
single employer under subsection (b), (c), (m), or (o) of sec- 
tion 414 shall be treated as a single employer for purposes 
of this section. 

"(B) Other rules. — Rules similar to the rules of sub- 
sections (c), (d), and (e) of section 52 shall apply. 
"(f) Credit Made Available to Tax-exempt Eligible Small 
Employers. — 

"(1) In general. — In the case of a tax-exempt eligible 
small employer, there shall be treated as a credit allowable 
under subpart C (and not allowable under this subpart) the 
lesser of — 

"(A) the amount of the credit determined under this 
section with respect to such employer, or 

"(B) the amount of the payroll taxes of the employer 
during the calendar year in which the taxable year begins. 
"(2) Tax-exempt eligible small employer. — For purposes 
of this section, the term 'tax-exempt eligible small employer' 
means an eligible small employer which is any organization de- 
scribed in section 501(c) which is exempt from taxation under 
section 501(a). 

"(3) Payroll taxes. — For purposes of this subsection — 
"(A) In general. — The term 'payroll taxes' means — 

"(i) amounts required to be withheld from the em- 
ployees of the tax-exempt eligible small employer 
under section 3401(a), 

"(ii) amounts required to be withheld from such 
employees under section 3101(b), and 

"(hi) amounts of the taxes imposed on the tax-ex- 
empt eligible small employer under section 3111(b). 
"(B) Special rule. — A rule similar to the rule of sec- 
tion 24(d)(2)(C) shall apply for purposes of subparagraph 
(A). 

"(g) Application of Section for Calendar Years 2010, 2011, 
2012, AND 2013.— [As revised by section 10105(e)(2)] In the case of 
any taxable year beginning in 2010, 2011, 2012, or 2013, the fol- 
lowing modifications to this section shall apply in determining the 
amount of the credit under subsection (a): 

"(1) No credit period required. — The credit shall be de- 
termined without regard to whether the taxable year is in a 
credit period and for purposes of applying this section to tax- 
able years beginning after 2013, no credit period shall be treat- 
ed as beginning with a taxable year beginning before 2014. 

"(2) Amount of credit. — The amount of the credit deter- 
mined under subsection (b) shall be determined — 

"(A) by substituting '35 percent (25 percent in the case 
of a tax-exempt eligible small employer)' for '50 percent (35 
percent in the case of a tax-exempt eligible small em- 
ployer)', 

"(B) by reference to an eligible small employer's non- 
elective contributions for premiums paid for health insur- 
ance coverage (within the meaning of section 9832(b)(1)) of 
an employee, and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1421 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



142 



"(C) by substituting for the average premium deter- 
mined under subsection (b)(2) the amount the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services determines is the average 
premium for the small group market in the State in which 
the employer is offering health insurance coverage (or for 
such area within the State as is specified by the Sec- 
retary). 

"(3) Contribution arrangement. — An arrangement shall 
not fail to meet the requirements of subsection (d)(4) solely be- 
cause it provides for the offering of insurance outside of an Ex- 
change. 

"(h) Insurance Definitions. — Any term used in this section 
which is also used in the Public Health Service Act or subtitle A 
of title I of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act shall 
have the meaning given such term by such Act or subtitle. 

"(i) Regulations. — The Secretary shall prescribe such regula- 
tions as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this sec- 
tion, including regulations to prevent the avoidance of the 2-year 
limit on the credit period through the use of successor entities and 
the avoidance of the limitations under subsection (c) through the 
use of multiple entities.". 

(b) Credit To Be Part of General Business Credit. — Sec- 
tion 38(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to current 
year business credit) is amended by striking "plus" at the end of 
paragraph (34), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (35) 
and inserting ", plus", and by inserting after paragraph (35) the fol- 
lowing: 

"(36) the small employer health insurance credit deter- 
mined under section 45R.". 

(c) Credit Allowed Against Alternative Minimum Tax. — 
Section 38(c)(4)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining 
specified credits) is amended by redesignating clauses (vi), (vii), 
and (viii) as clauses (vii), (viii), and (ix), respectively, and by insert- 
ing after clause (v) the following new clause: 

"(vi) the credit determined under section 45R,". 

(d) Disallowance of Deduction for Certain Expenses for 
Which Credit Allowed. — 

(1) In general. — Section 280C of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 (relating to disallowance of deduction for certain 
expenses for which credit allowed), as amended by section 
1401(b), is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection: 

"(h) Credit for Employee Health Insurance Expenses of 
Small Employers. — [As revised by section 10105(e)(3)~\ No deduc- 
tion shall be allowed for that portion of the premiums for qualified 
health plans (as defined in section 1301(a) of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act), or for health insurance coverage in the 
case of taxable years beginning in 2010, 2011, 2012, or 2013, paid 
by an employer which is equal to the amount of the credit deter- 
mined under section 45R(a) with respect to the premiums.". 

(2) Deduction for expiring credits. — Section 196(c) of 
such Code is amended by striking "and" at the end of para- 
graph (12), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (13) 

June 9, 2010 



143 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1501 



and inserting ", and", and by adding at the end the following 
new paragraph: 

"(14) the small employer health insurance credit deter- 
mined under section 45R(a).". 

(e) Clerical Amendment. — The table of sections for subpart D 
of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"Sec. 45R. Employee health insurance expenses of small employers.". 

(f) Effective Dates. — [As revised by section 10105(e)(4)~\ 

(1) In general. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to amounts paid or incurred in taxable years begin- 
ning after December 31, 2009. 

(2) Minimum tax. — The amendments made by subsection 
(c) shall apply to credits determined under section 45R of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 in taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 2009, and to carrybacks of such credits. 

Subtitle F — Shared Responsibility for 
Health Care 

PART I— INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY 

SEC. 1501 [42 U.S.C. 18091]. REQUIREMENT TO MAINTAIN MINIMUM ES- 
SENTIAL COVERAGE. 

(a) Findings. — Congress makes the following findings: 

(1) In general. — The individual responsibility require- 
ment provided for in this section (in this subsection referred to 
as the "requirement") is commercial and economic in nature, 
and substantially affects interstate commerce, as a result of 
the effects described in paragraph (2). 

(2) Effects on the national economy and interstate 
commerce. — [Replaced by section 10106(a)~\ The effects de- 
scribed in this paragraph are the following: 

(A) The requirement regulates activity that is commer- 
cial and economic in nature: economic and financial deci- 
sions about how and when health care is paid for, and 
when health insurance is purchased. In the absence of the 
requirement, some individuals would make an economic 
and financial decision to forego health insurance coverage 
and attempt to self-insure, which increases financial risks 
to households and medical providers. 

(B) Health insurance and health care services are a 
significant part of the national economy. National health 
spending is projected to increase from $2,500,000,000,000, 
or 17.6 percent of the economy, in 2009 to 
$4,700,000,000,000 in 2019. Private health insurance 
spending is projected to be $854,000,000,000 in 2009, and 
pays for medical supplies, drugs, and equipment that are 
shipped in interstate commerce. Since most health insur- 
ance is sold by national or regional health insurance com- 
panies, health insurance is sold in interstate commerce 
and claims payments flow through interstate commerce. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1501 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



144 



(C) The requirement, together with the other provi- 
sions of this Act, will add millions of new consumers to the 
health insurance market, increasing the supply of, and de- 
mand for, health care services, and will increase the num- 
ber and share of Americans who are insured. 

(D) The requirement achieves near-universal coverage 
by building upon and strengthening the private employer- 
based health insurance system, which covers 176,000,000 
Americans nationwide. In Massachusetts, a similar re- 
quirement has strengthened private employer-based cov- 
erage: despite the economic downturn, the number of 
workers offered employer-based coverage has actually in- 

(E) The economy loses up to $207,000,000,000 a year 
because of the poorer health and shorter lifespan of the 
uninsured. By significantly reducing the number of the un- 
insured, the requirement, together with the other provi- 
sions of this Act, will significantly reduce this economic 
cost. 

(F) The cost of providing uncompensated care to the 
uninsured was $43,000,000,000 in 2008. To pay for this 
cost, health care providers pass on the cost to private in- 
surers, which pass on the cost to families. This cost-shift- 
ing increases family premiums by on average over $1,000 
a year. By significantly reducing the number of the unin- 
sured, the requirement, together with the other provisions 
of this Act, will lower health insurance premiums. 

(G) 62 percent of all personal bankruptcies are caused 
in part by medical expenses. By significantly increasing 
health insurance coverage, the requirement, together with 
the other provisions of this Act, will improve financial se- 
curity for families. 

(H) Under the Employee Retirement Income Security 
Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.), the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 201 et seq.), and this Act, the Fed- 
eral Government has a significant role in regulating health 
insurance. The requirement is an essential part of this 
larger regulation of economic activity, and the absence of 
the requirement would undercut Federal regulation of the 
health insurance market. 

(I) Under sections 2704 and 2705 of the Public Health 
Service Act (as added by section 1201 of this Act), if there 
were no requirement, many individuals would wait to pur- 
chase health insurance until they needed care. By signifi- 
cantly increasing health insurance coverage, the require- 
ment, together with the other provisions of this Act, will 
minimize this adverse selection and broaden the health in- 
surance risk pool to include healthy individuals, which will 
lower health insurance premiums. The requirement is es- 
sential to creating effective health insurance markets in 
which improved health insurance products that are guar- 
anteed issue and do not exclude coverage of pre-existing 
conditions can be sold. 

June 9, 2010 



145 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1501 



(J) Administrative costs for private health insurance, 
which were $90,000,000,000 in 2006, are 26 to 30 percent 
of premiums in the current individual and small group 
markets. By significantly increasing health insurance cov- 
erage and the size of purchasing pools, which will increase 
economies of scale, the requirement, together with the 
other provisions of this Act, will significantly reduce ad- 
ministrative costs and lower health insurance premiums. 
The requirement is essential to creating effective health 
insurance markets that do not require underwriting and 
eliminate its associated administrative costs. 
(3) Supreme court ruling. — In United States v. South- 
Eastern Underwriters Association (322 U.S. 533 (1944)), the 
Supreme Court of the United States ruled that insurance is 
interstate commerce subject to Federal regulation, 
(b) In General. — Subtitle D of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new chapter: 

"CHAPTER 48— MAINTENANCE OF MINIMUM ESSENTIAL 

COVERAGE 

Sec. 1501\5000A IRC 
"Sec. 5000A. Requirement to maintain minimum essential coverage. 

"SEC. 5000A. REQUIREMENT TO MAINTAIN MINIMUM ESSENTIAL COV- 
ERAGE. 

"(a) Requirement To Maintain Minimum Essential Cov- 
erage. — An applicable individual shall for each month beginning 
after 2013 ensure that the individual, and any dependent of the in- 
dividual who is an applicable individual, is covered under min- 
imum essential coverage for such month. 
"(b) Shared Responsibility Payment. — 

"(1) In general. — [Replaced by section 10106(b)~\ If a tax- 
payer who is an applicable individual, or an applicable indi- 
vidual for whom the taxpayer is liable under paragraph (3), 
fails to meet the requirement of subsection (a) for 1 or more 
months, then, except as provided in subsection (e), there is 
hereby imposed on the taxpayer a penalty with respect to such 
failures in the amount determined under subsection (c). 

"(2) Inclusion with return. — Any penalty imposed by 
this section with respect to any month shall be included with 
a taxpayer's return under chapter 1 for the taxable year which 
includes such month. 

"(3) Payment of penalty. — If an individual with respect 
to whom a penalty is imposed by this section for any month — 
"(A) is a dependent (as defined in section 152) of an- 
other taxpayer for the other taxpayer's taxable year in- 
cluding such month, such other taxpayer shall be liable for 
such penalty, or 

"(B) files a joint return for the taxable year including 
such month, such individual and the spouse of such indi- 
vidual shall be jointly liable for such penalty. 
"(c) Amount of Penalty. — [Paragraphs (1) and (2) were re- 
vised in their entirety by section 10106(b)(2)~\ 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1501 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



146 



"(1) In general. — The amount of the penalty imposed by 
this section on any taxpayer for any taxable year with respect 
to failures described in subsection (b)(1) shall be equal to the 
lesser of — 

"(A) the sum of the monthly penalty amounts deter- 
mined under paragraph (2) for months in the taxable year 
during which 1 or more such failures occurred, or 

"(B) an amount equal to the national average premium 
for qualified health plans which have a bronze level of cov- 
erage, provide coverage for the applicable family size in- 
volved, and are offered through Exchanges for plan years 
beginning in the calendar year with or within which the 
taxable year ends. 

"(2) Monthly penalty amounts. — For purposes of para- 
graph (1)(A), the monthly penalty amount with respect to any 
taxpayer for any month during which any failure described in 
subsection (b)(1) occurred is an amount equal to Y12 of the 
greater of the following amounts: 

"(A) Flat dollar amount. — An amount equal to the 

lesser of — 

"(i) the sum of the applicable dollar amounts for 
all individuals with respect to whom such failure oc- 
curred during such month, or 

"(ii) 300 percent of the applicable dollar amount 
(determined without regard to paragraph (3)(C)) for 
the calendar year with or within which the taxable 
year ends. 

"(B) Percentage of income. — [As revised by section 
1002(a)(1) of HCERAi An amount equal to the following 
percentage of the excess of the taxpayer's household in- 
come for the taxable year over the amount of gross income 
specified in section 6012(a)(1) with respect to the taxpayer 
for the taxable year: 

"(i) 1.0 percent for taxable years beginning in 

2014. 

"(ii) 2.0 percent for taxable years beginning in 
2015. 

"(hi) 2.5 percent for taxable years beginning after 
2015. 

"(3) Applicable dollar amount. — [As revised by section 
10106(b)(3) and by section 1002(a)(2) of HCERA\ For purposes 
of paragraph (1) — 

"(A) In general. — Except as provided in subpara- 
graphs (B) and (C), the applicable dollar amount is $695. 

"(B) Phase in. — The applicable dollar amount is $95 
for 2014 and $325 for 2015. 

"(C) Special rule for individuals under age is. — 
If an applicable individual has not attained the age of 18 
as of the beginning of a month, the applicable dollar 
amount with respect to such individual for the month shall 
be equal to one-half of the applicable dollar amount for the 
calendar year in which the month occurs. 

"(D) Indexing of amount. — In the case of any cal- 
endar year beginning after 2016, the applicable dollar 

June 9, 2010 



147 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1501 



amount shall be equal to $695, increased by an amount 
equal to — 

"(i) $695, multiplied by 

"(ii) the cost-of-living adjustment determined 
under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year, determined 
by substituting 'calendar year 2015' for 'calendar year 
1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof. 
If the amount of any increase under clause (i) is not a mul- 
tiple of $50, such increase shall be rounded to the next 
lowest multiple of $50. 

"(4) Terms relating to income and families. — For pur- 
poses of this section — 

"(A) Family size. — The family size involved with re- 
spect to any taxpayer shall be equal to the number of indi- 
viduals for whom the taxpayer is allowed a deduction 
under section 151 (relating to allowance of deduction for 
personal exemptions) for the taxable year. 

"(B) Household income. — The term 'household in- 
come' means, with respect to any taxpayer for any taxable 
year, an amount equal to the sum of — [shown to reflect 
probable amendment made by section 1004(a)(1)(C) of 
HCERA~\ 

"(i) the modified adjusted gross income of the tax- 
payer, plus 

"(ii) the aggregate modified adjusted gross in- 
comes of all other individuals who — 

"(I) were taken into account in determining 
the taxpayer's family size under paragraph (1), 
and 

"(II) were required to file a return of tax im- 
posed by section 1 for the taxable year. 
"(C) Modified adjusted gross income. — [Replaced 
by section 1004(a)(2)(B)~\ The term 'modified adjusted gross 
income' means adjusted gross income increased by — 

"(i) any amount excluded from gross income under 
section 911, and 

"(ii) any amount of interest received or accrued by 
the taxpayer during the taxable year which is exempt 
from tax. 

"(d) Applicable Individual. — For purposes of this section — 

"(1) In general. — The term 'applicable individual' means, 
with respect to any month, an individual other than an indi- 
vidual described in paragraph (2), (3), or (4). 
"(2) Religious exemptions. — 

"(A) Religious conscience exemption. — [Replaced 
by section 10106(c)~\ Such term shall not include any indi- 
vidual for any month if such individual has in effect an ex- 
emption under section 1311(d)(4)(H) of the Patient Protec- 
tion and Affordable Care Act which certifies that such in- 
dividual is — 

"(i) a member of a recognized religious sect or divi- 
sion thereof which is described in section 1402(g)(1), 
and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1501 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



148 



"(ii) an adherent of established tenets or teachings 
of such sect or division as described in such section. 
"(B) Health care sharing ministry. — 

"(i) In general. — Such term shall not include any 
individual for any month if such individual is a mem- 
ber of a health care sharing ministry for the month. 

"(ii) Health care sharing ministry. — The term 
'health care sharing ministry' means an organiza- 
tion — 

"(I) which is described in section 501(c)(3) and 
is exempt from taxation under section 501(a), 

"(II) members of which share a common set of 
ethical or religious beliefs and share medical ex- 
penses among members in accordance with those 
beliefs and without regard to the State in which 
a member resides or is employed, 

"(III) members of which retain membership 
even after they develop a medical condition, 

"(IV) which (or a predecessor of which) has 
been in existence at all times since December 31, 
1999, and medical expenses of its members have 
been shared continuously and without interrup- 
tion since at least December 31, 1999, and 

"(V) which conducts an annual audit which is 
performed by an independent certified public ac- 
counting firm in accordance with generally accept- 
ed accounting principles and which is made avail- 
able to the public upon request. 
"(3) Individuals not lawfully present. — Such term 
shall not include an individual for any month if for the month 
the individual is not a citizen or national of the United States 
or an alien lawfully present in the United States. 

"(4) Incarcerated individuals. — Such term shall not in- 
clude an individual for any month if for the month the indi- 
vidual is incarcerated, other than incarceration pending the 
disposition of charges. 

"(e) Exemptions. — No penalty shall be imposed under sub- 
section (a) with respect to — 

"(1) Individuals who cannot afford coverage. — 

"(A) In general. — Any applicable individual for any 
month if the applicable individual's required contribution 
(determined on an annual basis) for coverage for the 
month exceeds 8 percent of such individual's household in- 
come for the taxable year described in section 1412(b)(1)(B) 
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. For pur- 
poses of applying this subparagraph, the taxpayer's house- 
hold income shall be increased by any exclusion from gross 
income for any portion of the required contribution made 
through a salary reduction arrangement. 

"(B) Required contribution. — For purposes of this 
paragraph, the term 'required contribution' means — 

"(i) in the case of an individual eligible to pur- 
chase minimum essential coverage consisting of cov- 
erage through an eligible-employer-sponsored plan, the 

June 9, 2010 



149 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1501 



portion of the annual premium which would be paid 
by the individual (without regard to whether paid 
through salary reduction or otherwise) for self-only 
coverage, or 

"(ii) in the case of an individual eligible only to 
purchase minimum essential coverage described in 
subsection (f)(1)(C), the annual premium for the lowest 
cost bronze plan available in the individual market 
through the Exchange in the State in the rating area 
in which the individual resides (without regard to 
whether the individual purchased a qualified health 
plan through the Exchange), reduced by the amount of 
the credit allowable under section 36B for the taxable 
year (determined as if the individual was covered by 
a qualified health plan offered through the Exchange 
for the entire taxable year). 

"(C) Special rules for individuals related to em- 
ployees. — [Replaced by section 10106(d)] For purposes of 
subparagraph (B)(i), if an applicable individual is eligible 
for minimum essential coverage through an employer by 
reason of a relationship to an employee, the determination 
under subparagraph (A) shall be made by reference to re- 
quired contribution of the employee. 

"(D) Indexing. — In the case of plan years beginning in 
any calendar year after 2014, subparagraph (A) shall be 
applied by substituting for '8 percent' the percentage the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services determines re- 
flects the excess of the rate of premium growth between 
the preceding calendar year and 2013 over the rate of in- 
come growth for such period. 

"(2) Taxpayers with income below filing threshold. — 
[As revised by section 1002(b)(2) ofHCERA] Any applicable in- 
dividual for any month during a calendar year if the individ- 
ual's household income for the taxable year described in section 
1412(b)(1)(B) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 
is less than the amount of gross income specified in section 
6012(a)(1) with respect to the taxpayer. 

"(3) Members of Indian tribes. — Any applicable indi- 
vidual for any month during which the individual is a member 
of an Indian tribe (as defined in section 45A(c)(6)). 
"(4) Months during short coverage gaps. — 

"(A) In general. — Any month the last day of which 
occurred during a period in which the applicable individual 
was not covered by minimum essential coverage for a con- 
tinuous period of less than 3 months. 

"(B) Special rules. — For purposes of applying this 
paragraph — 

"(i) the length of a continuous period shall be de- 
termined without regard to the calendar years in 
which months in such period occur, 

"(ii) if a continuous period is greater than the pe- 
riod allowed under subparagraph (A), no exception 
shall be provided under this paragraph for any month 
in the period, and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1501 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



150 



"(iii) if there is more than 1 continuous period de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A) covering months in a cal- 
endar year, the exception provided by this paragraph 
shall only apply to months in the first of such periods. 
The Secretary shall prescribe rules for the collection of the 
penalty imposed by this section in cases where continuous 
periods include months in more than 1 taxable year. 
"(5) Hardships. — Any applicable individual who for any 
month is determined by the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services under section 1311(d)(4)(H) to have suffered a hard- 
ship with respect to the capability to obtain coverage under a 
qualified health plan. 

"(f) Minimum Essential Coverage. — For purposes of this sec- 
tion — 

"(1) In general. — The term 'minimum essential coverage' 
means any of the following: 

"(A) Government sponsored programs. — Coverage 
under — 

"(i) the Medicare program under part A of title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act, 

"(ii) the Medicaid program under title XIX of the 
Social Security Act, 

"(hi) the CHIP program under title XXI of the So- 
cial Security Act, 

"(iv) the TRICARE for Life program, 

"(v) the veteran's health care program under chap- 
ter 17 of title 38, United States Code, or 

"(vi) a health plan under section 2504(e) of title 
22, United States Code (relating to Peace Corps volun- 
teers). 

"(B) Employer-sponsored plan. — Coverage under an 
eligible employer-sponsored plan. 

"(C) Plans in the individual market. — Coverage 
under a health plan offered in the individual market with- 
in a State. 

"(D) Grandfathered health plan. — Coverage under 
a grandfathered health plan. 

"(E) Other coverage. — Such other health benefits 
coverage, such as a State health benefits risk pool, as the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services, in coordination 
with the Secretary, recognizes for purposes of this sub- 
section. 

"(2) Eligible employer-sponsored plan. — The term 'eli- 
gible employer-sponsored plan' means, with respect to any em- 
ployee, a group health plan or group health insurance coverage 
offered by an employer to the employee which is — 

"(A) a governmental plan (within the meaning of sec- 
tion 2791(d)(8) of the Public Health Service Act), or 

"(B) any other plan or coverage offered in the small or 
large group market within a State. 
Such term shall include a grandfathered health plan described 
in paragraph (1)(D) offered in a group market. 

"(3) Excepted benefits not treated as minimum essen- 
tial COVERAGE. — The term 'minimum essential coverage' shall 

June 9, 2010 



151 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1502 



not include health insurance coverage which consists of cov- 
erage of excepted benefits — 

"(A) described in paragraph (1) of subsection (c) of sec- 
tion 2791 of the Public Health Service Act; or 

"(B) described in paragraph (2), (3), or (4) of such sub- 
section if the benefits are provided under a separate policy, 
certificate, or contract of insurance. 

"(4) Individuals residing outside united states or 
residents OF territories. — Any applicable individual shall be 
treated as having minimum essential coverage for any 
month — 

"(A) if such month occurs during any period described 
in subparagraph (A) or (B) of section 911(d)(1) which is ap- 
plicable to the individual, or 

"(B) if such individual is a bona fide resident of any 
possession of the United States (as determined under sec- 
tion 937(a)) for such month. 

"(5) Insurance-related terms. — Any term used in this 
section which is also used in title I of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act shall have the same meaning as when 
used in such title. 

"(g) Administration and Procedure. — 

"(1) In general. — The penalty provided by this section 
shall be paid upon notice and demand by the Secretary, and 
except as provided in paragraph (2), shall be assessed and col- 
lected in the same manner as an assessable penalty under sub- 
chapter B of chapter 68. 

"(2) Special rules. — Notwithstanding any other provision 
of law — 

"(A) Waiver of criminal penalties. — In the case of 
any failure by a taxpayer to timely pay any penalty im- 
posed by this section, such taxpayer shall not be subject to 
any criminal prosecution or penalty with respect to such 
failure. 

"(B) Limitations on liens and levies. — The Sec- 
retary shall not — 

"(i) file notice of lien with respect to any property 
of a taxpayer by reason of any failure to pay the pen- 
alty imposed by this section, or 

"(ii) levy on any such property with respect to 
such failure.". 

(c) Clerical Amendment. — The table of chapters for subtitle 
D of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting 
after the item relating to chapter 47 the following new item: 

"Chapter 48 — Maintenance of Minimum Essential Coverage.". 

(d) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to taxable years ending after December 31, 2013. 

SEC. 1502. REPORTING OF HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE. 

(a) In General. — Part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after sub- 
part C the following new subpart: 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1502X6055 IRC 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



152 



"Subpart D — Information Regarding Health 
Insurance Coverage 

"Sec. 6055. Reporting of health insurance coverage. 

"SEC. 6055. REPORTING OF HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE. 

"(a) In General. — Every person who provides minimum essen- 
tial coverage to an individual during a calendar year shall, at such 
time as the Secretary may prescribe, make a return described in 
subsection (b). 

"(b) Form and Manner of Return. — 

"(1) In GENERAL. — A return is described in this subsection 

if such return — 

"(A) is in such form as the Secretary may prescribe, 

and 

"(B) contains — 

"(i) the name, address and TIN of the primary in- 
sured and the name and TIN of each other individual 
obtaining coverage under the policy, 

"(ii) the dates during which such individual was 
covered under minimum essential coverage during the 
calendar year, 

"(hi) in the case of minimum essential coverage 
which consists of health insurance coverage, informa- 
tion concerning — 

"(I) whether or not the coverage is a qualified 
health plan offered through an Exchange estab- 
lished under section 1311 of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act, and 

"(II) in the case of a qualified health plan, the 
amount (if any) of any advance payment under 
section 1412 of the Patient Protection and Afford- 
able Care Act of any cost-sharing reduction under 
section 1402 of such Act or of any premium tax 
credit under section 36B with respect to such cov- 
erage, and 

"(iv) such other information as the Secretary may 
require. 

"(2) Information relating to employer-provided cov- 
erage. — If minimum essential coverage provided to an indi- 
vidual under subsection (a) consists of health insurance cov- 
erage of a health insurance issuer provided through a group 
health plan of an employer, a return described in this sub- 
section shall include — 

"(A) the name, address, and employer identification 
number of the employer maintaining the plan, 

"(B) the portion of the premium (if any) required to be 
paid by the employer, and 

"(C) if the health insurance coverage is a qualified 
health plan in the small group market offered through an 
Exchange, such other information as the Secretary may re- 
quire for administration of the credit under section 45R 
(relating to credit for employee health insurance expenses 
of small employers). 

June 9, 2010 



153 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1502 



"(c) Statements To Be Furnished to Individuals With Re- 
spect to Whom Information Is Reported. — 

"(1) In general. — Every person required to make a return 
under subsection (a) shall furnish to each individual whose 
name is required to be set forth in such return a written state- 
ment showing — 

"(A) the name and address of the person required to 
make such return and the phone number of the informa- 
tion contact for such person, and 

"(B) the information required to be shown on the re- 
turn with respect to such individual. 

"(2) Time for furnishing statements. — The written 
statement required under paragraph (1) shall be furnished on 
or before January 31 of the year following the calendar year 
for which the return under subsection (a) was required to be 
made. 

"(d) Coverage Provided by Governmental Units. — In the 
case of coverage provided by any governmental unit or any agency 
or instrumentality thereof, the officer or employee who enters into 
the agreement to provide such coverage (or the person appro- 
priately designated for purposes of this section) shall make the re- 
turns and statements required by this section. 

"(e) Minimum Essential Coverage. — For purposes of this sec- 
tion, the term 'minimum essential coverage' has the meaning given 
such term by section 5000A(f).". 

(b) Assessable Penalties. — 

(1) Subparagraph (B) of section 6724(d)(1) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to definitions) is amended by 
striking "or" at the end of clause (xxii), by striking "and" at the 
end of clause (xxiii) and inserting "or", and by inserting after 
clause (xxiii) the following new clause: 

"(xxiv) section 6055 (relating to returns relating to 
information regarding health insurance coverage), 
and". 

(2) Paragraph (2) of section 6724(d) of such Code is amend- 
ed by striking "or" at the end of subparagraph (EE), by strik- 
ing the period at the end of subparagraph (FF) and inserting 
", or" and by inserting after subparagraph (FF) the following 
new subparagraph: 

"(GG) section 6055(c) (relating to statements relating 
to information regarding health insurance coverage).". 

(c) Notification of Nonenrollment. — Not later than June 
30 of each year, the Secretary of the Treasury, acting through the 
Internal Revenue Service and in consultation with the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services, shall send a notification to each indi- 
vidual who files an individual income tax return and who is not en- 
rolled in minimum essential coverage (as denned in section 5000A 
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986). Such notification shall con- 
tain information on the services available through the Exchange 
operating in the State in which such individual resides. 

(d) Conforming Amendment. — The table of subparts for part 
III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by in- 
serting after the item relating to subpart C the following new item: 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1511 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



154 



"SUBPART D — INFORMATION REGARDING HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE". 

(e) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to calendar years beginning after 2013. 

PART II— EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITIES 

SEC. 1511. AUTOMATIC ENROLLMENT FOR EMPLOYEES OF LARGE EM- 
PLOYERS. 

The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 is amended by inserting 
after section 18 (29 U.S.C. 218) the following: 

"SEC. 18A [29 U.S.C. 218a]. AUTOMATIC ENROLLMENT FOR EMPLOYEES 
OF LARGE EMPLOYERS. 

"In accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary, 
an employer to which this Act applies that has more than 200 full- 
time employees and that offers employees enrollment in 1 or more 
health benefits plans shall automatically enroll new full-time em- 
ployees in one of the plans offered (subject to any waiting period 
authorized by law) and to continue the enrollment of current em- 
ployees in a health benefits plan offered through the employer. Any 
automatic enrollment program shall include adequate notice and 
the opportunity for an employee to opt out of any coverage the indi- 
vidual or employee were automatically enrolled in. Nothing in this 
section shall be construed to supersede any State law which estab- 
lishes, implements, or continues in effect any standard or require- 
ment relating to employers in connection with payroll except to the 
extent that such standard or requirement prevents an employer 
from instituting the automatic enrollment program under this sec- 
tion.". 

SEC. 1512. EMPLOYER REQUIREMENT TO INFORM EMPLOYEES OF 
COVERAGE OPTIONS. 

The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 is amended by inserting 
after section 18A (as added by section 1513) the following: 

"SEC. 18B [29 U.S.C. 218b]. NOTICE TO EMPLOYEES. 

"(a) In General. — In accordance with regulations promulgated 
by the Secretary, an employer to which this Act applies, shall pro- 
vide to each employee at the time of hiring (or with respect to cur- 
rent employees, not later than March 1, 2013), written notice — 

"(1) informing the employee of the existence of an Ex- 
change, including a description of the services provided by such 
Exchange, and the manner in which the employee may contact 
the Exchange to request assistance; 

"(2) if the employer plan's share of the total allowed costs 
of benefits provided under the plan is less than 60 percent of 
such costs, that the employee may be eligible for a premium 
tax credit under section 36B of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 and a cost sharing reduction under section 1402 of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act if the employee 
purchases a qualified health plan through the Exchange; and 
"(3) [As revised by section 10108(0(2)1 if the employee pur- 
chases a qualified health plan through the Exchange and the 
employer does not offer a free choice voucher, the employee 
may lose the employer contribution (if any) to any health bene- 
fits plan offered by the employer and that all or a portion of 

June 9, 2010 



155 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1513V4980H IRC 



such contribution may be excludable from income for Federal 
income tax purposes. 

"(b) Effective Date. — Subsection (a) shall take effect with re- 
spect to employers in a State beginning on March 1, 2013.". 

SEC. 1513. SHARED RESPONSIBILITY FOR EMPLOYERS. 

(a) In General. — Chapter 43 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"SEC. 4980H. SHARED RESPONSIBILITY FOR EMPLOYERS REGARDING 
HEALTH COVERAGE. 

"(a) Large Employers Not Offering Health Coverage. — 

If— 

"(1) any applicable large employer fails to offer to its full- 
time employees (and their dependents) the opportunity to en- 
roll in minimum essential coverage under an eligible employer- 
sponsored plan (as defined in section 5000A(f)(2)) for any 
month, and 

"(2) at least one full-time employee of the applicable large 
employer has been certified to the employer under section 1411 
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act as having en- 
rolled for such month in a qualified health plan with respect 
to which an applicable premium tax credit or cost-sharing re- 
duction is allowed or paid with respect to the employee, 
then there is hereby imposed on the employer an assessable pay- 
ment equal to the product of the applicable payment amount and 
the number of individuals employed by the employer as full-time 
employees during such month. 

["(b) Large Employers With Waiting Periods Exceeding 60 
Days. — [Replaced first by section 10106(e) and stricken by section 
1003(d) of HCERA and succeeding subsections were redesignated 
accordingly]] 

"(b) Large Employers Offering Coverage With Employees 
Who Qualify for Premium Tax Credits or Cost-sharing Re- 
ductions. — 

"(1) In general. — If— 

"(A) an applicable large employer offers to its full-time 
employees (and their dependents) the opportunity to enroll 
in minimum essential coverage under an eligible employer- 
sponsored plan (as denned in section 5000A(f)(2)) for any 
month, and 

"(B) 1 or more full-time employees of the applicable 
large employer has been certified to the employer under 
section 1411 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act as having enrolled for such month in a qualified health 
plan with respect to which an applicable premium tax 
credit or cost-sharing reduction is allowed or paid with re- 
spect to the employee, 
then there is hereby imposed on the employer an assessable 
payment equal to the product of the number of full-time em- 
ployees of the applicable large employer described in subpara- 
raph (B) for such month and an amount equal to Viz of 
3,000. [As revised by section 1003(b)(1) of HCERA] 

"(2) Overall limitation. — The aggregate amount of tax 
determined under paragraph (1) with respect to all employees 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1513N4980H IRC 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



156 



of an applicable large employer for any month shall not exceed 
the product of the applicable payment amount and the number 
of individuals employed by the employer as full-time employees 
during such month. 

"(3) Special rules for employers providing free 
choice vouchers. — [As added by section 10108(i)(l)~\ No as- 
sessable payment shall be imposed under paragraph (1) for any 
month with respect to any employee to whom the employer 
provides a free choice voucher under section 10108 of the Pa- 
tient Protection and Affordable Care Act for such month. 
"(c) Definitions and Special Rules. — For purposes of this 
section — 

"(1) Applicable payment amount. — The term 'applicable 
payment amount' means, with respect to any month, 1 /i2 of 
$2,000. [As revised by section 1003(b)(2) of HCERA] 
"(2) Applicable large employer. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'applicable large em- 
ployer' means, with respect to a calendar year, an em- 
ployer who employed an average of at least 50 full-time 
employees on business days during the preceding calendar 
year. 

"(B) Exemption for certain employers. — 

"(i) In general. — An employer shall not be consid- 
ered to employ more than 50 full-time employees if — 
"(I) the employer's workforce exceeds 50 full- 
time employees for 120 days or fewer during the 
calendar year, and 

"(II) the employees in excess of 50 employed 
during such 120-day period were seasonal work- 
ers. 

"(ii) Definition of seasonal workers. — The 
term 'seasonal worker' means a worker who performs 
labor or services on a seasonal basis as defined by the 
Secretary of Labor, including workers covered by sec- 
tion 500.20(s)(l) of title 29, Code of Federal Regula- 
tions and retail workers employed exclusively during 
holiday seasons. 

"(C) Rules for determining employer size. — For 
purposes of this paragraph — 

"(i) Application of aggregation rule for em- 
ployers. — All persons treated as a single employer 
under subsection (b), (c), (m), or (o) of section 414 of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be treated as 
1 employer. 

"(ii) Employers not in existence in preceding 
YEAR. — In the case of an employer which was not in 
existence throughout the preceding calendar year, the 
determination of whether such employer is an applica- 
ble large employer shall be based on the average num- 
ber of employees that it is reasonably expected such 
employer will employ on business days in the current 
calendar year. 

June 9, 2010 



157 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1513V4980H IRC 



"(iii) Predecessors. — Any reference in this sub- 
section to an employer shall include a reference to any 
predecessor of such employer. 
[Previous subparagraph (D), relating to application to construc- 
tion industry employers, added by section 10106 but replaced, as 
shown below, by section 1003(a) of HCERA] 

"(D) Application of employer size to assessable 

PENALTIES. — 

"(i) In general. — The number of individuals em- 
ployed by an applicable large employer as full-time 
employees during any month shall be reduced by 30 
solely for purposes of calculating — 

"(I) the assessable payment under subsection 

(a) , or 

"(II) the overall limitation under subsection 

(b) (2). 

"(ii) Aggregation. — In the case of persons treated 
as 1 employer under subparagraph (C)(i), only 1 reduc- 
tion under subclause (I) or (II) shall be allowed with 
respect to such persons and such reduction shall be al- 
located among such persons ratably on the basis of the 
number of full-time employees employed by each such 
person. 

"(E) Full-time equivalents treated as full-time 
employees. — [As added by section 1003(c) of HCERA] 
Solely for purposes of determining whether an employer is 
an applicable large employer under this paragraph, an em- 
ployer shall, in addition to the number of full-time employ- 
ees for any month otherwise determined, include for such 
month a number of full-time employees determined by di- 
viding the aggregate number of hours of service of employ- 
ees who are not full-time employees for the month by 120. 
"(3) Applicable premium tax credit and cost-sharing 

reduction. — The term 'applicable premium tax credit and 

cost-sharing reduction' means — 

"(A) any premium tax credit allowed under section 
36B, 

"(B) any cost-sharing reduction under section 1402 of 
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, and 

"(C) any advance payment of such credit or reduction 
under section 1412 of such Act. 
"(4) Full-time employee. — 

"(A) In general. — [As revised by section 10106(f)(1)] 
The term 'full-time employee' means, with respect to any 
month, an employee who is employed on average at least 
30 hours of service per week. 

"(B) Hours of service. — The Secretary, in consulta- 
tion with the Secretary of Labor, shall prescribe such regu- 
lations, rules, and guidance as may be necessary to deter- 
mine the hours of service of an employee, including rules 
for the application of this paragraph to employees who are 
not compensated on an hourly basis. 
"(5) Inflation adjustment. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1513 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



158 



"(A) In general. — In the case of any calendar year 
after 2014, each of the dollar amounts in subsection (b) 
and paragraph (1) shall be increased by an amount equal 
to the product of — [As revised by section 1003(a)(3) of 
HCERA] 

"(i) such dollar amount, and 

"(ii) the premium adjustment percentage (as de- 
fined in section 1302(c)(4) of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act) for the calendar year. 
"(B) Rounding. — If the amount of any increase under 
subparagraph (A) is not a multiple of $10, such increase 
shall be rounded to the next lowest multiple of $10. 
"(6) Other definitions. — Any term used in this section 
which is also used in the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act shall have the same meaning as when used in such 
Act. 

"(7) Tax nondeductible. — For denial of deduction for the 
tax imposed by this section, see section 275(a)(6). 
"(d) Administration and Procedure. — 

"(1) In general. — Any assessable payment provided by 
this section shall be paid upon notice and demand by the Sec- 
retary, and shall be assessed and collected in the same manner 
as an assessable penalty under subchapter B of chapter 68. 

"(2) Time for payment. — The Secretary may provide for 
the payment of any assessable payment provided by this sec- 
tion on an annual, monthly, or other periodic basis as the Sec- 
retary may prescribe. 

"(3) Coordination with credits, etc.. — The Secretary 
shall prescribe rules, regulations, or guidance for the repay- 
ment of any assessable payment (including interest) if such 
payment is based on the allowance or payment of an applicable 
premium tax credit or cost-sharing reduction with respect to an 
employee, such allowance or payment is subsequently dis- 
allowed, and the assessable payment would not have been re- 
quired to be made but for such allowance or payment.". 

(b) Clerical Amendment. — The table of sections for chapter 
43 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new 
item: 

"Sec. 4980H. Shared responsibility for employers regarding health coverage.". 

(c) Study and Report of Effect of Tax on Workers' 
Wages — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary of Labor shall conduct a 
study to determine whether employees' wages are reduced by 
reason of the application of the assessable payments under sec- 
tion 4980H of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by 
the amendments made by this section). The Secretary shall 
make such determination on the basis of the National Com- 
pensation Survey published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 

(2) Report. — The Secretary shall report the results of the 
study under paragraph (1) to the Committee on Ways and 
Means of the House of Representatives and to the Committee 
on Finance of the Senate. 

June 9, 2010 



159 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1514NB056 IRC 



(d) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to months beginning after December 31, 2013. 

SEC. 1514. REPORTING OF EMPLOYER HEALTH INSURANCE COV- 
ERAGE. 

(a) In General. — Subpart D of part III of subchapter A of 
chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by sec- 
tion 1502, is amended by inserting after section 6055 the following 
new section: 

"SEC. 6056. CERTAIN EMPLOYERS REQUIRED TO REPORT ON HEALTH 
INSURANCE COVERAGE. 

[Heading revised by section 10108(j)(3)(A)~\ 
"(a) In General. — [As revised by section 10108(j)(l)~\ Every ap- 
plicable large employer required to meet the requirements of sec- 
tion 4980H with respect to its full-time employees during a cal- 
endar year and every offering employer shall, at such time as the 
Secretary may prescribe, make a return described in subsection (b). 

"(b) Form and Manner of Return. — A return is described in 
this subsection if such return — 

"(1) is in such form as the Secretary may prescribe, and 
"(2) contains — 

"(A) the name, date, and employer identification num- 
ber of the employer, 

"(B) a certification as to whether the employer offers 
to its full-time employees (and their dependents) the op- 
portunity to enroll in minimum essential coverage under 
an eligible employer-sponsored plan (as defined in section 
5000A(f)(2)), 

"(C) [As revised by section 10108(j)(3)(B), including 
addition of clause (v)~\ if the employer certifies that the 
employer did offer to its full-time employees (and their de- 
pendents) the opportunity to so enroll — 

"(i) in the case of an applicable large employer, 
the length of any waiting period (as defined in section 
2701(b)(4) of the Public Health Service Act) with re- 
spect to such coverage, 

"(ii) the months during the calendar year for 
which coverage under the plan was available, 

"(hi) the monthly premium for the lowest cost op- 
tion in each of the enrollment categories under the 
plan, 

"(iv) the employer's share of the total allowed 
costs of benefits provided under the plan, and 

"(v) in the case of an offering employer, the option 
for which the employer pays the largest portion of the 
cost of the plan and the portion of the cost paid by the 
employer in each of the enrollment categories under 
such option, 

"(D) the number of full-time employees for each month 
during the calendar year, 

"(E) the name, address, and TIN of each full-time em- 
ployee during the calendar year and the months (if any) 
during which such employee (and any dependents) were 
covered under any such health benefits plans, and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1514NB056 IRC 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



160 



"(F) such other information as the Secretary may re- 
quire. 

[Sentence added by section 10106(g)~\ The Secretary shall have 
the authority to review the accuracy of the information pro- 
vided under this subsection, including the applicable large em- 
ployer's share under paragraph (2)(C)(iv). 
"(c) Statements To Be Furnished to Individuals With Re- 
spect to Whom Information Is Reported. — 

"(1) In general. — Every person required to make a return 
under subsection (a) shall furnish to each full-time employee 
whose name is required to be set forth in such return under 
subsection (b)(2)(E) a written statement showing — 

"(A) the name and address of the person required to 
make such return and the phone number of the informa- 
tion contact for such person, and 

"(B) the information required to be shown on the re- 
turn with respect to such individual. 

"(2) Time for furnishing statements. — The written 
statement required under paragraph (1) shall be furnished on 
or before January 31 of the year following the calendar year 
for which the return under subsection (a) was required to be 
made. 

"(d) Coordination With Other Requirements. — To the max- 
imum extent feasible, the Secretary may provide that — 

"(1) any return or statement required to be provided under 
this section may be provided as part of any return or state- 
ment required under section 6051 or 6055, and 

"(2) [As revised by section 10108(j)(3)(C)~\ in the case of an 
applicable large employer or offering employer offering health 
insurance coverage of a health insurance issuer, the employer 
may enter into an agreement with the issuer to include infor- 
mation required under this section with the return and state- 
ment required to be provided by the issuer under section 6055. 
"(e) Coverage Provided by Governmental Units. — [As re- 
vised by section 10108(j)(3)(D)~\ In the case of any applicable large 
employer or offering employer which is a governmental unit or any 
agency or instrumentality thereof, the person appropriately des- 
ignated for purposes of this section shall make the returns and 
statements required by this section. 

"(f) Definitions— [Replaced by section 10108(j)(2)] For pur- 
poses of this section — 

"(1) Offering employer. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'offering employer' means 
any offering employer (as defined in section 10108(b) of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act) if the required 
contribution (within the meaning of section 
5000A(e)(l)(B)(i)) of any employee exceeds 8 percent of the 
wages (as defined in section 3121(a)) paid to such em- 
ployee by such employer. 

"(B) Indexing. — In the case of any calendar year be- 
ginning after 2014, the 8 percent under subparagraph (A) 
shall be adjusted for the calendar year to reflect the rate 
of premium growth between the preceding calendar year 
and 2013 over the rate of income growth for such period. 

June 9, 2010 



161 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1515 



"(2) Other definitions. — Any term used in this section 
which is also used in section 4980H shall have the meaning 
given such term by section 4980H.". 

(b) Assessable Penalties. — 

(1) Subparagraph (B) of section 6724(d)(1) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to definitions), as amended by 
section 1502, is amended by striking "or" at the end of clause 
(xxiii), by striking "and" at the end of clause (xxiv) and insert- 
ing "or", and by inserting after clause (xxiv) the following new 
clause: {Clause revised by section 10108(j)(3)(E)~\ 

"(xxv) section 6056 (relating to returns relating to 
certain employers required to report on health insur- 
ance coverage), and". 

(2) Paragraph (2) of section 6724(d) of such Code, as so 
amended, is amended by striking "or" at the end of subpara- 
graph (FF), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph 
(GG) and inserting ", or" and by inserting after subparagraph 
(GG) the following new subparagraph: [As revised by section 
10108(j)(3)(F)l 

"(HH) section 6056(c) (relating to statements relating 
to certain employers required to report on health insur- 
ance coverage).". 

(c) Conforming Amendment. — The table of sections for sub- 
part D of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code, as 
added by section 1502, is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new item: [As revised by section 10108(j)(3)(G)~\ 

"Sec. 6056. Certain employers required to report on health insurance coverage.". 

(d) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to periods beginning after December 31, 2013. 

SEC. 1515. OFFERING OF EXCHANGE-PARTICIPATING QUALIFIED 
HEALTH PLANS THROUGH CAFETERIA PLANS. 

(a) In General. — Subsection (f) of section 125 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new paragraph: 

"(3) Certain exchange-participating qualified health 
plans not qualified. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'qualified benefit' shall 
not include any qualified health plan (as defined in section 
1301(a) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act) 
offered through an Exchange established under section 
1311 of such Act. 

"(B) Exception for exchange-eligible employers. — 
Subparagraph (A) shall not apply with respect to any em- 
ployee if such employee's employer is a qualified employer 
(as defined in section 1312(f)(2) of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act) offering the employee the oppor- 
tunity to enroll through such an Exchange in a qualified 
health plan in a group market.". 

(b) Conforming Amendments. — Subsection (f) of section 125 
of such Code is amended — 

(1) by striking "For purposes of this section, the term" and 
inserting "For purposes of this section — 
"(1) In General. — The term", and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10108 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



162 



(2) by striking "Such term shall not include" and inserting 
the following: 

"(2) Long-term care insurance not qualified. — The 
term 'qualified benefit' shall not include". 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2013. 

[Note: Section 10108 provides for Free Choice Vouchers as fol- 
lows .] 

SEC. 10108 [42 U.S.C. 18101]. FREE CHOICE VOUCHERS 

[copied from title Xx and shown here for information purposes 
only]. 

(a) In General. — An offering employer shall provide free choice 
vouchers to each qualified employee of such employer. 

(b) Offering Employer. — For purposes of this section, the term 
"offering employer" means any employer who — 

(1) offers minimum essential coverage to its employees con- 
sisting of coverage through an eligible employer-sponsored plan; 
and 

(2) pays any portion of the costs of such plan. 

(c) Qualified Employee. — For purposes of this section — 

(1) In general. — The term "qualified employee" means, 
with respect to any plan year of an offering employer, any em- 
ployee — 

(A) whose required contribution (as determined under 
section 5000A(e)(l)(B)) for minimum essential coverage 
through an eligible employer-sponsored plan — 

(i) exceeds 8 percent of such employee's household 
income for the taxable year described in section 
1412(b)(1)(B) which ends with or within in the plan 
year; and 

(ii) does not exceed 9.8 percent of such employee's 
household income for such taxable year; 

(B) whose household income for such taxable year is 
not greater than 400 percent of the poverty line for a family 
of the size involved; and 

(C) who does not participate in a health plan offered 
by the offering employer. 

(2) Indexing. — In the case of any calendar year beginning 
after 2014, the Secretary shall adjust the 8 percent under para- 
graph (l)(A)(i) and 9.8 percent under paragraph (l)(A)(ii) for 
the calendar year to reflect the rate of premium growth between 
the preceding calendar year and 2013 over the rate of income 
growth for such period. 

(d) Free Choice Voucher. — 

(1) Amount. — 

(A) In general. — The amount of any free choice vouch- 
er provided under subsection (a) shall be equal to the 
monthly portion of the cost of the eligible employer-spon- 
sored plan which would have been paid by the employer if 
the employee were covered under the plan with respect to 
which the employer pays the largest portion of the cost of 
the plan. Such amount shall be equal to the amount the 
employer would pay for an employee with self-only coverage 

June 9, 2010 



163 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10108 



unless such employee elects family coverage (in which case 
such amount shall be the amount the employer would pay 
for family coverage). 

(B) Determination of cost. — The cost of any health 
plan shall be determined under the rules similar to the 
rules of section 2204 of the Public Health Service Act, ex- 
cept that such amount shall be adjusted for age and cat- 
egory of enrollment in accordance with regulations estab- 
lished by the Secretary. 

(2) Use of vouchers. — An Exchange shall credit the 
amount of any free choice voucher provided under subsection (a) 
to the monthly premium of any qualified health plan in the Ex- 
change in which the qualified employee is enrolled and the of- 
fering employer shall pay any amounts so credited to the Ex- 
change. 

(3) Payment of excess amounts. — If the amount of the 
free choice voucher exceeds the amount of the premium of the 
qualified health plan in which the qualified employee is en- 
rolled for such month, such excess shall be paid to the employee, 
(e) Other Definitions. — Any term used in this section which 

is also used in section 5000A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
shall have the meaning given such term under such section 5000A. 
(ft Exclusion From Income for Employee. — 

(1) In general. — Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting 
after section 139C the following new section: 

"SEC. 139D. FREE CHOICE VOUCHERS. 

"Gross income shall not include the amount of any free choice 
voucher provided by an employer under section 10108 of the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act to the extent that the amount of 
such voucher does not exceed the amount paid for a qualified health 
plan (as defined in section 1301 of such Act) by the taxpayer.". 

(2) Clerical amendment. — The table of sections for part 
III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by 
inserting after the item relating to section 139C the following 
new item: 

"Sec. 139D. Free choice vouchers.". 

(3) Effective date. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section shall apply to vouchers provided after December 31, 
2013. 

(g) Deduction Allowed to Employer. — 

(1) In general. — Section 162(a) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following 
new sentence: "For purposes of paragraph ( 1), the amount of a 
free choice voucher provided under section 10108 of the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act shall be treated as an 
amount for compensation for personal services actually ren- 
dered.". 

(2) Effecttve date. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section shall apply to vouchers provided after December 31, 
2013. 

(h) Voucher Taken Into Account in Determining Premium 
Credit. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1551 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



164 



(1) [Added a subparagraph (D) to section 36(c)(2) of the 
IRC, added by section 1401] 

(2) Effective date. — The amendment made by this sub- 
section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 
31, 2013. 

(i) Coordination With Employer Responsibilities. — 

(1) Shared responsibility penalty. — 

(A) [Added a paragraph (3) to section 4980H(c) of the 
IRC, added by section 1513 ] 

(B) Effective date. — The amendment made by this 
paragraph shall apply to months beginning after December 
31, 2013. 

(2) [Amended section 18B(a)(3) of FLSA, added by section 
1512] 

(j) Employer Reporting. — 

(1) [Amended section 6056(a) of the IRC, added by section 
1514] 

(2) [Replaced subsection (f) of section 6056 of the IRC, 
added by section 1514 ] 

(3) [Made miscellaneous conforming amendments to sec- 
tions 6056 and 6724(d) of the IRC, added by section 1514, as 
well as a table of sections amendment] 

(4) Effective date. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section shall apply to periods beginning after December 31, 
2013. 

Subtitle G — Miscellaneous Provisions 

SEC. 1551 [42 U.S.C. 18111]. DEFINITIONS. 

Unless specifically provided for otherwise, the definitions con- 
tained in section 2791 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
300gg-91) shall apply with respect to this title. 
SEC. 1552 [42 U.S.C. 18112]. TRANSPARENCY IN GOVERNMENT. 

Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall publish on the 
Internet website of the Department of Health and Human Services, 
a list of all of the authorities provided to the Secretary under this 
Act (and the amendments made by this Act). 

SEC. 1553 [42 U.S.C. 18113]. PROHIBITION AGAINST DISCRIMINATION 
ON ASSISTED SUICIDE. 

(a) In General. — The Federal Government, and any State or 
local government or health care provider that receives Federal fi- 
nancial assistance under this Act (or under an amendment made 
by this Act) or any health plan created under this Act (or under 
an amendment made by this Act), may not subject an individual 
or institutional health care entity to discrimination on the basis 
that the entity does not provide any health care item or service fur- 
nished for the purpose of causing, or for the purpose of assisting 
in causing, the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, 
euthanasia, or mercy killing. 

(b) Definition. — In this section, the term "health care entity" 
includes an individual physician or other health care professional, 
a hospital, a provider-sponsored organization, a health mainte- 

June 9, 2010 



165 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1556 



nance organization, a health insurance plan, or any other kind of 
health care facility, organization, or plan. 

(c) Construction and Treatment of Certain Services. — 
Nothing in subsection (a) shall be construed to apply to, or to af- 
fect, any limitation relating to — 

(1) the withholding or withdrawing of medical treatment 
or medical care; 

(2) the withholding or withdrawing of nutrition or hydra- 
tion; 

(3) abortion; or 

(4) the use of an item, good, benefit, or service furnished 
for the purpose of alleviating pain or discomfort, even if such 
use may increase the risk of death, so long as such item, good, 
benefit, or service is not also furnished for the purpose of caus- 
ing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, death, for any rea- 
son. 

(d) Administration. — The Office for Civil Rights of the Depart- 
ment of Health and Human Services is designated to receive com- 
plaints of discrimination based on this section. 

SEC. 1554 [42 U.S.C. 18114]. ACCESS TO THERAPIES. 

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the Secretary 
of Health and Human Services shall not promulgate any regulation 
that— 

(1) creates any unreasonable barriers to the ability of indi- 
viduals to obtain appropriate medical care; 

(2) impedes timely access to health care services; 

(3) interferes with communications regarding a full range 
of treatment options between the patient and the provider; 

(4) restricts the ability of health care providers to provide 
full disclosure of all relevant information to patients making 
health care decisions; 

(5) violates the principles of informed consent and the eth- 
ical standards of health care professionals; or 

(6) limits the availability of health care treatment for the 
full duration of a patient's medical needs. 

SEC. 1555 [42 U.S.C. 18115]. FREEDOM NOT TO PARTICIPATE IN FED- 
ERAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAMS. 

No individual, company, business, nonprofit entity, or health 
insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance cov- 
erage shall be required to participate in any Federal health insur- 
ance program created under this Act (or any amendments made by 
this Act), or in any Federal health insurance program expanded by 
this Act (or any such amendments), and there shall be no penalty 
or fine imposed upon any such issuer for choosing not to participate 
in such programs. 

SEC. 1556. EQUITY FOR CERTAIN ELIGIBLE SURVD/ORS. 

(a) Rebuttable Presumption. — Section 411(c)(4) of the Black 
Lung Benefits Act (30 U.S.C. 921(c)(4)) is amended by striking the 
last sentence. 

(b) Continuation of Benefits. — Section 422(1) of the Black 
Lung Benefits Act (30 U.S.C. 932(1)) is amended by striking ", ex- 
cept with respect to a claim filed under this part on or after the 
effective date of the Black Lung Benefits Amendments of 1981". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1557 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



166 



(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply with respect to claims filed under part B or part C of 
the Black Lung Benefits Act (30 U.S.C. 921 et seq., 931 et seq.) 
after January 1, 2005, that are pending on or after the date of en- 
actment of this Act. 

SEC. 1557 [42 U.S.C. 18116]. NONDISCRIMINATION. 

(a) In General. — Except as otherwise provided for in this title 
(or an amendment made by this title), an individual shall not, on 
the ground prohibited under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 
(42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), title IX of the Education Amendments of 

1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.), the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 
(42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.), or section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 

1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), be excluded from participation in, be denied 
the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under, any health 
program or activity, any part of which is receiving Federal financial 
assistance, including credits, subsidies, or contracts of insurance, or 
under any program or activity that is administered by an Executive 
Agency or any entity established under this title (or amendments). 
The enforcement mechanisms provided for and available under 
such title VI, title IX, section 504, or such Age Discrimination Act 
shall apply for purposes of violations of this subsection. 

(b) Continued Application of Laws. — Nothing in this title (or 
an amendment made by this title) shall be construed to invalidate 
or limit the rights, remedies, procedures, or legal standards avail- 
able to individuals aggrieved under title VI of the Civil Rights Act 
of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), title VII of the Civil Rights Act 
of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.), title IX of the Education Amend- 
ments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.), section 504 of the Rehabili- 
tation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), or the Age Discrimination Act 
of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 611 et seq.), or to supersede State laws that pro- 
vide additional protections against discrimination on any basis de- 
scribed in subsection (a). 

(c) Regulations. — The Secretary may promulgate regulations 
to implement this section. 

SEC. 1558. PROTECTIONS FOR EMPLOYEES. 

The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 is amended by inserting 
after section 18B (as added by section 1512) the following: 

"SEC. 18C [29 U.S.C. 218c]. PROTECTIONS FOR EMPLOYEES. 

"(a) Prohibition. — No employer shall discharge or in any man- 
ner discriminate against any employee with respect to his or her 
compensation, terms, conditions, or other privileges of employment 
because the employee (or an individual acting at the request of the 
employee) has — 

"(1) received a credit under section 36B of the Internal 

Revenue Code of 1986 or a subsidy under section 1402 of this 

Act; 

"(2) provided, caused to be provided, or is about to provide 
or cause to be provided to the employer, the Federal Govern- 
ment, or the attorney general of a State information relating 
to any violation of, or any act or omission the employee reason- 
ably believes to be a violation of, any provision of this title (or 
an amendment made by this title); 

June 9, 2010 



167 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1560 



"(3) testified or is about to testify in a proceeding con- 
cerning such violation; 

"(4) assisted or participated, or is about to assist or partici- 
pate, in such a proceeding; or 

"(5) objected to, or refused to participate in, any activity, 
policy, practice, or assigned task that the employee (or other 
such person) reasonably believed to be in violation of any pro- 
vision of this title (or amendment), or any order, rule, regula- 
tion, standard, or ban under this title (or amendment). 
"(b) Complaint Procedure. — 

"(1) In general. — An employee who believes that he or 
she has been discharged or otherwise discriminated against by 
any employer in violation of this section may seek relief in ac- 
cordance with the procedures, notifications, burdens of proof, 
remedies, and statutes of limitation set forth in section 2087(b) 
of title 15, United States Code. 

"(2) No limitation on rights. — Nothing in this section 
shall be deemed to diminish the rights, privileges, or remedies 
of any employee under any Federal or State law or under any 
collective bargaining agreement. The rights and remedies in 
this section may not be waived by any agreement, policy, form, 
or condition of employment.". 

SEC. 1559 [42 U.S.C. 18117]. OVERSIGHT. 

The Inspector General of the Department of Health and 
Human Services shall have oversight authority with respect to the 
administration and implementation of this title as it relates to such 
Department. 

SEC. 1560 [42 U.S.C. 18118]. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. 

(a) No Effect on Antitrust Laws. — Nothing in this title (or 
an amendment made by this title) shall be construed to modify, im- 
pair, or supersede the operation of any of the antitrust laws. For 
the purposes of this section, the term "antitrust laws" has the 
meaning given such term in subsection (a) of the first section of the 
Clayton Act, except that such term includes section 5 of the Fed- 
eral Trade Commission Act to the extent that such section 5 ap- 
plies to unfair methods of competition. 

(b) Rule of Construction Regarding Hawaii's Prepaid 
Health Care Act. — Nothing in this title (or an amendment made 
by this title) shall be construed to modify or limit the application 
of the exemption for Hawaii's Prepaid Health Care Act (Haw. Rev. 
Stat. §§ 393-1 et seq.) as provided for under section 514(b)(5) of the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 
1144(b)(5)). 

(c) Student Health Insurance Plans. — Nothing in this title 
(or an amendment made by this title) shall be construed to prohibit 
an institution of higher education (as such term is denned for pur- 
poses of the Higher Education Act of 1965) from offering a student 
health insurance plan, to the extent that such requirement is oth- 
erwise permitted under applicable Federal, State or local law. 

(d) No Effect on Existing Requirements. — Nothing in this 
title (or an amendment made by this title, unless specified by di- 
rect statutory reference) shall be construed to modify any existing 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1561 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



168 



Federal requirement concerning the State agency responsible for 
determining eligibility for programs identified in section 1413. 

SEC. 1561. HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ENROLLMENT 
STANDARDS AND PROTOCOLS. 

Title XXX of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj et 

seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"Subtitle C — Other Provisions 

"SEC. 3021 [42 U.S.C. 300jj-51]. HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
ENROLLMENT STANDARDS AND PROTOCOLS. 

"(a) In General. — 

"(1) Standards and protocols. — Not later than 180 days 
after the date of enactment of this title, the Secretary, in con- 
sultation with the HIT Policy Committee and the HIT Stand- 
ards Committee, shall develop interoperable and secure stand- 
ards and protocols that facilitate enrollment of individuals in 
Federal and State health and human services programs, as de- 
termined by the Secretary. 

"(2) Methods. — The Secretary shall facilitate enrollment 
in such programs through methods determined appropriate by 
the Secretary, which shall include providing individuals and 
third parties authorized by such individuals and their des- 
ignees notification of eligibility and verification of eligibility re- 
quired under such programs. 

"(b) Content. — The standards and protocols for electronic en- 
rollment in the Federal and State programs described in subsection 
(a) shall allow for the following: 

"(1) Electronic matching against existing Federal and 
State data, including vital records, employment history, enroll- 
ment systems, tax records, and other data determined appro- 
priate by the Secretary to serve as evidence of eligibility and 
in lieu of paper-based documentation. 

"(2) Simplification and submission of electronic documenta- 
tion, digitization of documents, and systems verification of eli- 
gibility. 

"(3) Reuse of stored eligibility information (including docu- 
mentation) to assist with retention of eligible individuals. 

"(4) Capability for individuals to apply, recertify and man- 
age their eligibility information online, including at home, at 
points of service, and other community-based locations. 

"(5) Ability to expand the enrollment system to integrate 
new programs, rules, and functionalities, to operate at in- 
creased volume, and to apply streamlined verification and eli- 
gibility processes to other Federal and State programs, as ap- 
propriate. 

"(6) Notification of eligibility, recertification, and other 
needed communication regarding eligibility, which may include 
communication via email and cellular phones. 

"(7) Other functionalities necessary to provide eligibles 
with streamlined enrollment process. 

"(c) Approval and Notification. — With respect to any stand- 
ard or protocol developed under subsection (a) that has been ap- 

June 9, 2010 



169 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1562 



proved by the HIT Policy Committee and the HIT Standards Com- 
mittee, the Secretary — 

"(1) shall notify States of such standards or protocols; and 
"(2) may require, as a condition of receiving Federal funds 
for the health information technology investments, that States 
or other entities incorporate such standards and protocols into 
such investments. 

"(d) Grants for Implementation of Appropriate Enroll- 
ment HIT. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall award grant to eli- 
gible entities to develop new, and adapt existing, technology 
systems to implement the HIT enrollment standards and pro- 
tocols developed under subsection (a) (referred to in this sub- 
section as 'appropriate HIT technology'). 

"(2) Eligible entities. — To be eligible for a grant under 
this subsection, an entity shall — 

"(A) be a State, political subdivision of a State, or a 
local governmental entity; and 

"(B) submit to the Secretary an application at such 
time, in such manner, and containing — 

"(i) a plan to adopt and implement appropriate en- 
rollment technology that includes — 

"(I) proposed reduction in maintenance costs 
of technology systems; 

"(II) elimination or updating of legacy sys- 
tems; and 

"(III) demonstrated collaboration with other 
entities that may receive a grant under this sec- 
tion that are located in the same State, political 
subdivision, or locality; 

"(ii) an assurance that the entity will share such 

appropriate enrollment technology in accordance with 

paragraph (4); and 

"(hi) such other information as the Secretary may 

require. 
"(3) Sharing— 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall ensure that ap- 
propriate enrollment HIT adopted under grants under this 
subsection is made available to other qualified State, 
qualified political subdivisions of a State, or other appro- 
priate qualified entities (as described in subparagraph (B)) 
at no cost. 

"(B) Qualified entities. — The Secretary shall deter- 
mine what entities are qualified to receive enrollment HIT 
under subparagraph (A), taking into consideration the rec- 
ommendations of the HIT Policy Committee and the HIT 
Standards Committee.". 

SEC. 1562. GAO STUDY REGARDING THE RATE OF DENIAL OF COV- 
ERAGE AND ENROLLMENT BY HEALTH INSURANCE 
ISSUERS AND GROUP HEALTH PLANS. 

[Section inserted by section 10107(b)(2)~\ 

(a) In General. — The Comptroller General of the United 
States (referred to in this section as the "Comptroller General") 
shall conduct a study of the incidence of denials of coverage for 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1563 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



170 



medical services and denials of applications to enroll in health in- 
surance plans, as described in subsection (b), by group health plans 
and health insurance issuers. 

(b) Data. — 

(1) In general. — In conducting the study described in sub- 
section (a), the Comptroller General shall consider samples of 
data concerning the following: 

(A) (i) denials of coverage for medical services to a plan 
enrollees, by the types of services for which such coverage 
was denied; and 

(ii) the reasons such coverage was denied; and 

(B) (i) incidents in which group health plans and 
health insurance issuers deny the application of an indi- 
vidual to enroll in a health insurance plan offered by such 
group health plan or issuer; and 

(ii) the reasons such applications are denied. 

(2) Scope of data. — 

(A) Favorably resolved disputes. — The data that 
the Comptroller General considers under paragraph (1) 
shall include data concerning denials of coverage for med- 
ical services and denials of applications for enrollment in 
a plan by a group health plan or health insurance issuer, 
where such group health plan or health insurance issuer 
later approves such coverage or application. 

(B) All health plans. — The study under this section 
shall consider data from varied group health plans and 
health insurance plans offered by health insurance issuers, 
including qualified health plans and health plans that are 
not qualified health plans. 

(c) Report. — Not later than one year after the date of enact- 
ment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit to the Sec- 
retaries of Health and Human Services and Labor a report describ- 
ing the results of the study conducted under this section. 

(d) Publication of Report. — The Secretaries of Health and 
Human Services and Labor shall make the report described in sub- 
section (c) available to the public on an Internet website. 

[The following section 1563 (relating to small business procure- 
ment) inserted by section 10107(b)(2)~\ 

SEC. 1563. SMALL BUSINESS PROCUREMENT. 

Part 19 of the Federal Acquisition Regulation, section 15 of the 
Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 644), and any other applicable laws 
or regulations establishing procurement requirements relating to 
small business concerns (as defined in section 3 of the Small Busi- 
ness Act (15 U.S.C. 632)) may not be waived with respect to any 
contract awarded under any program or other authority under this 
Act or an amendment made by this Act. 

[The following section 1563 (relating to conforming amend- 
ments) redesignated from section 1562 by section 10107(b)(l)~\ 

SEC. 1563 [sic]. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS. 

(a) Applicability. — Section 2735 of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-21), as so redesignated by section 1001(4), is 
amended — 

(1) by striking subsection (a); 

June 9, 2010 



171 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1563 



(2) in subsection (b) — 

(A) in paragraph (1), by striking "1 through 3" and in- 
serting "1 and 2"; and 

(B) in paragraph (2) — 

(i) in subparagraph (A), by striking "subparagraph 
(D)" and inserting "subparagraph (D) or (E)"; 

(ii) by striking "1 through 3" and inserting "1 and 
2"; and 

(iii) by adding at the end the following: [Provision 
likely amended by section 10107(a)~\ 

"(E) Election not applicable. — The election de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A) shall not be available with re- 
spect to the provisions of subparts I and II."; 

(3) in subsection (c), by striking "1 through 3 shall not 
apply to any group" and inserting "1 and 2 shall not apply to 
any individual coverage or any group"; and 

(4) in subsection (d) — 

(A) in paragraph (1), by striking "1 through 3 shall not 
apply to any group" and inserting "1 and 2 shall not apply 
to any individual coverage or any group"; 

(B) in paragraph (2) — 

(i) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by 
striking "1 through 3 shall not apply to any group" 
and inserting "1 and 2 shall not apply to any indi- 
vidual coverage or any group"; and 

(ii) in subparagraph (C), by inserting "or, with re- 
spect to individual coverage, under any health insur- 
ance coverage maintained by the same health insur- 
ance issuer"; and 

(C) in paragraph (3), by striking "any group" and in- 
serting "any individual coverage or any group". 

(b) Definitions— Section 2791(d) of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-91(d)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following: 

"(20) Qualified health plan. — The term 'qualified health 
plan' has the meaning given such term in section 1301(a) of 
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 

"(21) Exchange. — The term 'Exchange' means an Amer- 
ican Health Benefit Exchange established under section 1311 
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.". 

(c) Technical and Conforming Amendments. — Title XXVII of 
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg et seq.) is amend- 
ed— 

(1) in section 2704 (42 U.S.C. 300gg), as so redesignated by 
section 1201(2)— 

(A) in subsection (c) — 

(i) in paragraph (2), by striking "group health 
plan" each place that such term appears and inserting 
"group or individual health plan"; and 

(ii) in paragraph (3) — 

(I) by striking "group health insurance" each 
place that such term appears and inserting "group 
or individual health insurance"; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1563 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



172 



(II) in subparagraph (D), by striking "small or 
large" and inserting "individual or group"; 

(B) in subsection (d), by striking "group health insur- 
ance" each place that such term appears and inserting 
"group or individual health insurance"; and 

(C) in subsection (e)(1)(A), by striking "group health 
insurance" and inserting "group or individual health insur- 
ance"; 

(2) by striking the second heading for subpart 2 of part A 
(relating to other requirements); 

(3) in section 2725 (42 U.S.C. 300gg-4), as so redesignated 
by section 1001(2)— 

(A) in subsection (a), by striking "health insurance 
issuer offering group health insurance coverage" and in- 
serting "health insurance issuer offering group or indi- 
vidual health insurance coverage"; 

(B) in subsection (b) — 

(i) by striking "health insurance issuer offering 
group health insurance coverage in connection with a 
group health plan" in the matter preceding paragraph 
(1) and inserting "health insurance issuer offering 
group or individual health insurance coverage"; and 

(ii) in paragraph (1), by striking "plan" and insert- 
ing "plan or coverage"; 

(C) in subsection (c) — 

(i) in paragraph (2), by striking "group health in- 
surance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer" 
and inserting "health insurance issuer offering group 
or individual health insurance coverage"; and 

(ii) in paragraph (3), by striking "issuer" and in- 
serting "health insurance issuer"; and 

(D) in subsection (e), by striking "health insurance 
issuer offering group health insurance coverage" and in- 
serting "health insurance issuer offering group or indi- 
vidual health insurance coverage"; 

(4) in section 2726 (42 U.S.C. 300gg-5), as so redesignated 
by section 1001(2)— 

(A) in subsection (a), by striking "(or health insurance 
coverage offered in connection with such a plan)" each 
place that such term appears and inserting "or a health in- 
surance issuer offering group or individual health insur- 
ance coverage"; 

(B) in subsection (b), by striking "(or health insurance 
coverage offered in connection with such a plan)" each 
place that such term appears and inserting "or a health in- 
surance issuer offering group or individual health insur- 
ance coverage"; and 

(C) in subsection (c) — 

(i) in paragraph (1), by striking "(and group health 
insurance coverage offered in connection with a group 
health plan)" and inserting "and a health insurance 
issuer offering group or individual health insurance 
coverage"; 

June 9, 2010 



173 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1563 



(ii) in paragraph (2), by striking "(or health insur- 
ance coverage offered in connection with such a plan)" 
each place that such term appears and inserting "or a 
health insurance issuer offering group or individual 
health insurance coverage"; 

(5) in section 2727 (42 U.S.C. 300gg-6), as so redesignated 
by section 1001(2), by striking "health insurance issuers pro- 
viding health insurance coverage in connection with group 
health plans" and inserting "and health insurance issuers of- 
fering group or individual health insurance coverage"; 

(6) in section 2728 (42 U.S.C. 300gg-7), as so redesignated 
by section 1001(2)— 

(A) in subsection (a), by striking "health insurance 
coverage offered in connection with such plan" and insert- 
ing "individual health insurance coverage"; 

(B) in subsection (b) — 

(i) in paragraph (1), by striking "or a health insur- 
ance issuer that provides health insurance coverage in 
connection with a group health plan" and inserting "or 
a health insurance issuer that offers group or indi- 
vidual health insurance coverage"; 

(ii) in paragraph (2), by striking "health insurance 
coverage offered in connection with the plan" and in- 
serting "individual health insurance coverage"; and 

(iii) in paragraph (3), by striking "health insur- 
ance coverage offered by an issuer in connection with 
such plan" and inserting "individual health insurance 
coverage"; 

(C) in subsection (c), by striking "health insurance 
issuer providing health insurance coverage in connection 
with a group health plan" and inserting "health insurance 
issuer that offers group or individual health insurance cov- 
erage"; and 

(D) in subsection (e)(1), by striking "health insurance 
coverage offered in connection with such a plan" and in- 
serting "individual health insurance coverage"; 

(7) by striking the heading for subpart 3; 

(8) in section 2731 (42 U.S.C. 300gg-ll), as so redesig- 
nated by section 1001(3) — 

(A) by striking the section heading and all that follows 
through subsection (b); 

(B) in subsection (c) — 

(i) in paragraph (1) — 

(I) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), 
by striking "small group" and inserting "group 
and individual"; and 

(II) in subparagraph (B) — 

(aa) in the matter preceding clause (i), by 
inserting "and individuals" after "employers"; 

(bb) in clause (i), by inserting "or any ad- 
ditional individuals" after "additional groups"; 
and 

(cc) in clause (ii), by striking "without re- 
gard to the claims experience of those employ- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1563 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



174 



ers and their employees (and their depend- 
ents) or any health status-related factor relat- 
ing to such" and inserting "and individuals 
without regard to the claims experience of 
those individuals, employers and their em- 
ployees (and their dependents) or any health 
status-related factor relating to such individ- 
uals"; and 

(ii) in paragraph (2), by striking "small group" and 
inserting "group or individual"; 

(C) in subsection (d) — 

(i) by striking "small group" each place that such 
appears and inserting "group or individual"; and 

(ii) in paragraph (1)(B) — 

(I) by striking "all employers" and inserting 
"all employers and individuals"; 

(II) by striking "those employers" and insert- 
ing "those individuals, employers"; and 

(III) by striking "such employees" and insert- 
ing "such individuals, employees"; 

(D) by striking subsection (e); 

(E) by striking subsection (f); and 

(F) by transferring such section (as amended by this 
paragraph) to appear at the end of section 2702 (as added 
by section 1001(4)); 

(9) in section 2732 (42 U.S.C. 300gg-12), as so redesig- 
nated by section 1001(3) — 

(A) by striking the section heading and all that follows 
through subsection (a); 

(B) in subsection (b) — 

(i) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by strik- 
ing "group health plan in the small or large group 
market" and inserting "health insurance coverage of- 
fered in the group or individual market"; 

(ii) in paragraph (1), by inserting ", or individual, 
as applicable," after "plan sponsor"; 

(iii) in paragraph (2), by inserting ", or individual, 
as applicable," after "plan sponsor"; and 

(iv) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the 
following: 

"(3) Violation of participation or contribution 
rates. — In the case of a group health plan, the plan sponsor 
has failed to comply with a material plan provision relating to 
employer contribution or group participation rules, pursuant to 
applicable State law."; 

(C) in subsection (c) — 

(i) in paragraph (1) — 

(I) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), 
by striking "group health insurance coverage of- 
fered in the small or large group market" and in- 
serting "group or individual health insurance cov- 
erage"; 

(II) in subparagraph (A), by inserting "or indi- 
vidual, as applicable," after "plan sponsor"; 

June 9, 2010 



175 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 1563 



(III) in subparagraph (B) — 

(aa) by inserting "or individual, as appli- 
cable," after "plan sponsor"; and 

(bb) by inserting "or individual health in- 
surance coverage"; and 

(IV) in subparagraph (C), by inserting "or in- 
dividuals, as applicable," after "those sponsors"; 
and 

(ii) in paragraph (2)(A) — 

(I) in the matter preceding clause (i), by strik- 
ing "small group market or the large group mar- 
ket, or both markets," and inserting "individual or 
group market, or all markets,"; and 

(II) in clause (i), by inserting "or individual, 
as applicable," after "plan sponsor"; and 

(D) by transferring such section (as amended by this 
paragraph) to appear at the end of section 2703 (as added 
by section 1001(4)); 

(10) in section 2733 (42 U.S.C. 300gg-13), as so redesig- 
nated by section 1001(4) — 

(A) in subsection (a) — 

(i) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by strik- 
ing "small employer" and inserting "small employer or 
an individual"; 

(ii) in paragraph (1), by inserting ", or individual, 
as applicable," after "employer" each place that such 
appears; and 

(iii) in paragraph (2), by striking "small employer" 
and inserting "employer, or individual, as applicable,"; 

(B) in subsection (b) — 

(i) in paragraph (1) — 

(I) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), 
by striking "small employer" and inserting "em- 
ployer, or individual, as applicable,"; 

(II) in subparagraph (A), by adding "and" at 
the end; 

(III) by striking subparagraphs (B) and (C); 

and 

(IV) in subparagraph (D) — 

(aa) by inserting ", or individual, as appli- 
cable," after "employer"; and 

(bb) by redesignating such subparagraph 
as subparagraph (B); 

(ii) in paragraph (2) — 

(I) by striking "small employers" each place 
that such term appears and inserting "employers, 
or individuals, as applicable,"; and 

(II) by striking "small employer" and inserting 
"employer, or individual, as applicable,"; and 

(C) by redesignating such section (as amended by this 
paragraph) as section 2709 and transferring such section 
to appear after section 2708 (as added by section 1001(5)); 

(11) by redesignating subpart 4 as subpart 2; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1563 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



176 



(12) in section 2735 (42 U.S.C. 300gg-21), as so redesig- 
nated by section 1001(4) — 

(A) by striking subsection (a); 

(B) by striking "subparts 1 through 3" each place that 
such appears and inserting "subpart 1"; 

(C) by redesignating subsections (b) through (e) as 
subsections (a) through (d), respectively; and 

(D) by redesignating such section (as amended by this 
paragraph) as section 2722; 

(13) in section 2736 (42 U.S.C. 300gg-22), as so redesig- 
nated by section 1001(4) — 

(A) in subsection (a) — 

(i) in paragraph (1), by striking "small or large 
group markets" and inserting "individual or group 
market"; and 

(ii) in paragraph (2), by inserting "or individual 
health insurance coverage" after "group health plans"; 

(B) in subsection (b)(1)(B), by inserting "individual 
health insurance coverage or" after "respect to"; and 

(C) by redesignating such section (as amended by this 
paragraph) as section 2723; 

(14) in section 2737(a)(1) (42 U.S.C. 300gg-23), as so re- 
designated by section 1001(4) — 

(A) by inserting "individual or" before "group health 
insurance"; and 

(B) by redesignating such section(as amended by this 
paragraph) as section 2724; 

(15) in section 2762 (42 U.S.C. 300gg-62)— 

(A) in the section heading by inserting "AND APPLI- 
CATION" before the period; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following: 
"(c) Application of Part A Provisions. — 

"(1) In general. — The provisions of part A shall apply to 
health insurance issuers providing health insurance coverage 
in the individual market in a State as provided for in such 
part. 

"(2) Clarification. — To the extent that any provision of 
this part conflicts with a provision of part A with respect to 
health insurance issuers providing health insurance coverage 
in the individual market in a State, the provisions of such part 
A shall apply."; and 

(16) in section 2791(e) (42 U.S.C. 300gg-91(e))— 

(A) in paragraph (2), by striking "51" and inserting 
"101"; and 

(B) in paragraph (4) — 

(i) by striking "at least 2" each place that such ap- 
pears and inserting "at least 1"; and 

(ii) by striking "50" and inserting "100". 

(d) Application.— [42 U.S.C. 18120] Notwithstanding any 
other provision of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 
nothing in such Act (or an amendment made by such Act) shall be 
construed to — 

(1) prohibit (or authorize the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services to promulgate regulations that prohibit) a 

June 9, 2010 



177 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 15B3N9815 IRC 



group health plan or health insurance issuer from carrying out 
utilization management techniques that are commonly used as 
of the date of enactment of this Act; or 

(2) restrict the application of the amendments made by 
this subtitle. 

(e) Technical Amendment to the Employee Retirement In- 
come Security Act of 1974. — Subpart B of part 7 of subtitle A 
of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(29 U.S.C. 1181 et. seq.) is amended, by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing: 

"SEC. 715 [29 U.S.C. 1185d]. ADDITIONAL MARKET REFORMS. 

"(a) General Rule. — Except as provided in subsection (b) — 

"(1) the provisions of part A of title XXVII of the Public 
Health Service Act (as amended by the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act) shall apply to group health plans, and 
health insurance issuers providing health insurance coverage 
in connection with group health plans, as if included in this 
subpart; and 

"(2) to the extent that any provision of this part conflicts 
with a provision of such part A with respect to group health 
plans, or health insurance issuers providing health insurance 
coverage in connection with group health plans, the provisions 
of such part A shall apply. 

"(b) Exception. — Notwithstanding subsection (a), the provi- 
sions of sections 2716 and 2718 of title XXVII of the Public Health 
Service Act (as amended by the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act) shall not apply with respect to self-insured group health 
plans, and the provisions of this part shall continue to apply to 
such plans as if such sections of the Public Health Service Act (as 
so amended) had not been enacted.". 

(f) Technical Amendment to the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986. — Subchapter B of chapter 100 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"SEC. 9815. ADDITIONAL MARKET REFORMS. 

"(a) General Rule. — Except as provided in subsection (b) — 

"(1) the provisions of part A of title XXVII of the Public 
Health Service Act (as amended by the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act) shall apply to group health plans, and 
health insurance issuers providing health insurance coverage 
in connection with group health plans, as if included in this 
subchapter; and 

"(2) to the extent that any provision of this subchapter con- 
flicts with a provision of such part A with respect to group 
health plans, or health insurance issuers providing health in- 
surance coverage in connection with group health plans, the 
provisions of such part A shall apply. 

"(b) Exception. — Notwithstanding subsection (a), the provi- 
sions of sections 2716 and 2718 of title XXVII of the Public Health 
Service Act (as amended by the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act) shall not apply with respect to self-insured group health 
plans, and the provisions of this subchapter shall continue to apply 
to such plans as if such sections of the Public Health Service Act 
(as so amended) had not been enacted.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1563 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



178 



{The following section 1563 (relating to Sense of the Senate 
promoting fiscal responsibility) was the original section 1563] 

SEC. 1563 [sic]. SENSE OF THE SENATE PROMOTING FISCAL RESPONSI- 
BILITY. 

(a) Findings. — The Senate makes the following findings: 

(1) Based on Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates, 
this Act will reduce the Federal deficit between 2010 and 2019. 

(2) CBO projects this Act will continue to reduce budget 
deficits after 2019. 

(3) Based on CBO estimates, this Act will extend the sol- 
vency of the Medicare HI Trust Fund. 

(4) This Act will increase the surplus in the Social Security 
Trust Fund, which should be reserved to strengthen the fi- 
nances of Social Security. 

(5) The initial net savings generated by the Community 
Living Assistance Services and Supports (CLASS) program are 
necessary to ensure the long-term solvency of that program. 

(b) Sense of the Senate. — It is the sense of the Senate that — 

(1) the additional surplus in the Social Security Trust 
Fund generated by this Act should be reserved for Social Secu- 
rity and not spent in this Act for other purposes; and 

(2) the net savings generated by the CLASS program 
should be reserved for the CLASS program and not spent in 
this Act for other purposes. 

[Note section 10108, p. 835, provides for free choice vouchers] 



179 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2001 



TITLE II— ROLE OF PUBLIC PROGRAMS 
Subtitle A — Improved Access to Medicaid 

SEC. 2001. MEDICAID COVERAGE FOR THE LOWEST INCOME POPU- 
LATIONS. 

(a) Coverage for Individuals With Income at or Below 
133 Percent of the Poverty Line. — 

(1) Beginning 2014.— Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a) is amended— 

(A) by striking "or" at the end of subclause (VI); 

(B) by adding "or" at the end of subclause (VII); and 

(C) by inserting after subclause (VII) the following: 

"(VIII) beginning January 1, 2014, who are 
under 65 years of age, not pregnant, not entitled 
to, or enrolled for, benefits under part A of title 
XVIII, or enrolled for benefits under part B of title 
XVIII, and are not described in a previous sub- 
clause of this clause, and whose income (as deter- 
mined under subsection (e)(14)) does not exceed 
133 percent of the poverty line (as denned in sec- 
tion 2110(c)(5)) applicable to a family of the size 
involved, subject to subsection (k);". 

(2) Provision of at least minimum essential cov- 
erage. — 

(A) In general.— Section 1902 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396a) is amended by inserting after subsection (j) the fol- 
lowing: 

"(k)(l) The medical assistance provided to an individual de- 
scribed in subclause (VIII) of subsection (a)(10)(A)(i) shall consist of 
benchmark coverage described in section 1937(b)(1) or benchmark 
equivalent coverage described in section 1937(b)(2). Such medical 
assistance shall be provided subject to the requirements of section 
1937, without regard to whether a State otherwise has elected the 
option to provide medical assistance through coverage under that 
section, unless an individual described in subclause (VIII) of sub- 
section (a)(10)(A)(i) is also an individual for whom, under subpara- 
graph (B) of section 1937(a)(2), the State may not require enroll- 
ment in benchmark coverage described in subsection (b)(1) of sec- 
tion 1937 or benchmark equivalent coverage described in sub- 
section (b)(2) of that section.". 

(B) Conforming amendment. — Section 1903(i) of the 
Social Security Act, as amended by section 6402(c), is 
amended — 

(i) in paragraph (24), by striking "or" at the end; 

(ii) in paragraph (25), by striking the period and 
inserting "; or"; and 

(iii) by adding at the end the following: 

"(26) with respect to any amounts expended for medical as- 
sistance for individuals described in subclause (VIII) of sub- 
section (a)(10)(A)(i) other than medical assistance provided 
through benchmark coverage described in section 1937(b)(1) or 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2001 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



180 



benchmark equivalent coverage described in section 
1937(b)(2).". 

(3) Federal funding for cost of covering newly eligi- 
ble individuals. — Section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396d), is amended— 

(A) in subsection (b), in the first sentence, by inserting 
"subsection (y) and" before "section 1933(d)"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new subsection: 
"(y) Increased FMAP for Medical Assistance for Newly 

Eligible Mandatory Individuals. — 

"(1) Amount of increase. — [Replaced by section 
1201(1)(B) of HCERA] Notwithstanding subsection (b), the 
Federal medical assistance percentage for a State that is one 
of the 50 States or the District of Columbia, with respect to 
amounts expended by such State for medical assistance for 
newly eligible individuals described in subclause (VIII) of sec- 
tion 1902(a)(10)(A)(i), shall be equal to— 

"(A) 100 percent for calendar quarters in 2014, 2015, 

and 2016; 

"(B) 95 percent for calendar quarters in 2017; 
"(C) 94 percent for calendar quarters in 2018; 
"(D) 93 percent for calendar quarters in 2019; and 
"(E) 90 percent for calendar quarters in 2020 and each 
year thereafter. 

"(2) Definitions. — In this subsection: 

"(A) Newly eligible. — The term 'newly eligible' 
means, with respect to an individual described in sub- 
clause (VIII) of section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i), an individual who 
is not under 19 years of age (or such higher age as the 
State may have elected) and who, as of December 1, 2009, 
is not eligible under the State plan or under a waiver of 
the plan for full benefits or for benchmark coverage de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of section 
1937(b)(1) or benchmark equivalent coverage described in 
section 1937(b)(2) that has an aggregate actuarial value 
that is at least actuarially equivalent to benchmark cov- 
erage described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of section 
1937(b)(1), or is eligible but not enrolled (or is on a waiting 
list) for such benefits or coverage through a waiver under 
the plan that has a capped or limited enrollment that is 
full. [As revised by section 10201(c)(3)(B)] 

"(B) Full benefits. — The term 'full benefits' means, 
with respect to an individual, medical assistance for all 
services covered under the State plan under this title that 
is not less in amount, duration, or scope, or is determined 
by the Secretary to be substantially equivalent, to the 
medical assistance available for an individual described in 
section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i). 
[Drafting note: subclause (II) of paragraph (l)(B)(ii), as origi- 
nally added by section 2001(a)(3) and as amended by section 
10201(c)(3)(A), was redesignated as paragraph (5) of subsection (z) 
and is shown in subsection (z), p. 841, as added by section 
10201(c)(4)] 

June 9, 2010 



181 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2001 



(4) State options to offer coverage earlier and pre- 
sumptive eligibility; children required to have coverage 
for parents to be eligible. — 

(A) In general. — Subsection (k) of section 1902 of the 
Social Security Act (as added by paragraph (2)), is amend- 
ed by inserting after paragraph (1) the following: 

"(2) [As revised by section 10201(b)~\ Beginning with the first 
day of any fiscal year quarter that begins on or after April 1, 2010, 
and before January 1, 2014, a State may elect through a State plan 
amendment to provide medical assistance to individuals who would 
be described in subclause (VIII) of subsection (a)(10)(A)(i) if that 
subclause were effective before January 1, 2014. A State may elect 
to phase-in the extension of eligibility for medical assistance to 
such individuals based on income, so long as the State does not ex- 
tend such eligibility to individuals described in such subclause with 
higher income before making individuals described in such sub- 
clause with lower income eligible for medical assistance. 

"(3) If an individual described in subclause (VIII) of subsection 
(a)(10)(A)(i) is the parent of a child who is under 19 years of age 
(or such higher age as the State may have elected) who is eligible 
for medical assistance under the State plan or under a waiver of 
such plan (under that subclause or under a State plan amendment 
under paragraph (2), the individual may not be enrolled under the 
State plan unless the individual's child is enrolled under the State 
plan or under a waiver of the plan or is enrolled in other health 
insurance coverage. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the 
term 'parent' includes an individual treated as a caretaker relative 
for purposes of carrying out section 1931.". 

(B) Presumptive eligibility. — Section 1920 of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-l) is amended by add- 
ing at the end the following: 

"(e) If the State has elected the option to provide a presump- 
tive eligibility period under this section or section 1920A, the State 
may elect to provide a presumptive eligibility period (as defined in 
subsection (b)(1)) for individuals who are eligible for medical assist- 
ance under clause (i)(VIII) of subsection (a)(10)(A) or section 1931 
in the same manner as the State provides for such a period under 
this section or section 1920A, subject to such guidance as the Sec- 
retary shall establish.". 

(5) Conforming amendments. — 

(A) Section 1902(a)(10) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396a(a)(10)) is amended in the matter following subpara- 
graph (G), by striking "and (XIV)" and inserting "(XIV)" 
and by inserting "and (XV) the medical assistance made 
available to an individual described in subparagraph 
(A)(i)(VIII) shall be limited to medical assistance described 
in subsection (k)(l)" before the semicolon. [Note that sec- 
tion 10201(a)(2) made an additional conforming amend- 
ment to reflect overlap with subparagraph (A)(i)(IX), added 
by section 2004(a)] 

(B) Section 1902(1X2X0 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396a(l)(2)(C)) is amended by striking "100" and inserting 
"133". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2001 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



182 



(C) Section 1905(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)) is 
amended in the matter preceding paragraph (1) — 

(i) by striking "or" at the end of clause (xii); 

(ii) by inserting "or" at the end of clause (xiii); and 

(iii) by inserting after clause (xiii) the following: 
"(xiv) individuals described in section 

1902(aX10)(A)(i)(VIII),". 

(D) Section 1903(f)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396b(f)(4)) is amended by inserting 
"1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIID," after "1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VII),". 

(E) Section 1937(a)(1)(B) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396u-7(a)(l)(B)) is amended by inserting "subclause 
(VIII) of section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i) or under" after "eligible 
under". 

(b) Maintenance of Medicaid Income Eligibility. — Section 
1902 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a) is amended— 

(1) in subsection (a) — 

(A) by striking "and" at the end of paragraph (72); 

(B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (73) 
and inserting "; and"; and 

(C) by inserting after paragraph (73) the following new 
paragraph: 

"(74) provide for maintenance of effort under the State 
plan or under any waiver of the plan in accordance with sub- 
section (gg)."; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: 
"(gg) Maintenance of Effort. — 

"(1) General requirement to maintain eligibility 
standards until state exchange is fully operational. — 
Subject to the succeeding paragraphs of this subsection, during 
the period that begins on the date of enactment of the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act and ends on the date on 
which the Secretary determines that an Exchange established 
by the State under section 1311 of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act is fully operational, as a condition for re- 
ceiving any Federal payments under section 1903(a) for cal- 
endar quarters occurring during such period, a State shall not 
have in effect eligibility standards, methodologies, or proce- 
dures under the State plan under this title or under any waiv- 
er of such plan that is in effect during that period, that are 
more restrictive than the eligibility standards, methodologies, 
or procedures, respectively, under the plan or waiver that are 
in effect on the date of enactment of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act. 

"(2) Continuation of eligibility standards for chil- 
dren until October l, 2019. — The requirement under para- 
graph (1) shall continue to apply to a State through September 
30, 2019, with respect to the eligibility standards, methodolo- 
gies, and procedures under the State plan under this title or 
under any waiver of such plan that are applicable to deter- 
mining the eligibility for medical assistance of any child who 
is under 19 years of age (or such higher age as the State may 
have elected). 

June 9, 2010 



183 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2001 



"(3) Nonapplication. — During the period that begins on 
January 1, 2011, and ends on December 31, 2013, the require- 
ment under paragraph (1) shall not apply to a State with re- 
spect to nonpregnant, nondisabled adults who are eligible for 
medical assistance under the State plan or under a waiver of 
the plan at the option of the State and whose income exceeds 
133 percent of the poverty line (as defined in section 2110(c)(5)) 
applicable to a family of the size involved if, on or after Decem- 
ber 31, 2010, the State certifies to the Secretary that, with re- 
spect to the State fiscal year during which the certification is 
made, the State has a budget deficit, or with respect to the 
succeeding State fiscal year, the State is projected to have a 
budget deficit. Upon submission of such a certification to the 
Secretary, the requirement under paragraph (1) shall not apply 
to the State with respect to any remaining portion of the pe- 
riod described in the preceding sentence. 
"(4) Determination of compliance. — 

"(A) States shall apply modified adjusted gross 
income. — A State's determination of income in accordance 
with subsection (e)(14) shall not be considered to be eligi- 
bility standards, methodologies, or procedures that are 
more restrictive than the standards, methodologies, or pro- 
cedures in effect under the State plan or under a waiver 
of the plan on the date of enactment of the Patient Protec- 
tion and Affordable Care Act for purposes of determining 
compliance with the requirements of paragraph (1), (2), or 
(3). [As revised by section 1004(b)(1)(B) ofHCERA] 

"(B) States may expand eligibility or move 

WAIVERED POPULATIONS INTO COVERAGE UNDER THE STATE 

plan. — With respect to any period applicable under para- 
graph (1), (2), or (3), a State that applies eligibility stand- 
ards, methodologies, or procedures under the State plan 
under this title or under any waiver of the plan that are 
less restrictive than the eligibility standards, methodolo- 
gies, or procedures, applied under the State plan or under 
a waiver of the plan on the date of enactment of the Pa- 
tient Protection and Affordable Care Act, or that makes in- 
dividuals who, on such date of enactment, are eligible for 
medical assistance under a waiver of the State plan, after 
such date of enactment eligible for medical assistance 
through a State plan amendment with an income eligi- 
bility level that is not less than the income eligibility level 
that applied under the waiver, or as a result of the appli- 
cation of subclause (VIII) of section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i), shall 
not be considered to have in effect eligibility standards, 
methodologies, or procedures that are more restrictive 
than the standards, methodologies, or procedures in effect 
under the State plan or under a waiver of the plan on the 
date of enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act for purposes of determining compliance with the 
requirements of paragraph (1), (2), or (3).". 
(c) Medicaid Benchmark Benefits Must Consist of at 

Least Minimum Essential Coverage. — Section 1937(b) of such 

Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-7(b)) is amended— 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2001 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



184 



(1) in paragraph (1), in the matter preceding subparagraph 
(A), by inserting "subject to paragraphs (5) and (6)," before 
"each"; 

(2) in paragraph (2) — 

(A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by in- 
serting "subject to paragraphs (5) and (6)" after "sub- 
section (a)(1),"; 

(B) in subparagraph (A) — 

(i) by redesignating clauses (iv) and (v) as clauses 
(vi) and (vii), respectively; and 

(ii) by inserting after clause (iii), the following: 
"(iv) Coverage of prescription drugs. 

"(v) Mental health services."; and 

(C) in subparagraph (C) — 

(i) by striking clauses (i) and (ii); and 

(ii) by redesignating clauses (iii) and (iv) as 
clauses (i) and (ii), respectively; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: 
"(5) Minimum standards. — Effective January 1, 2014, any 

benchmark benefit package under paragraph (1) or benchmark 
equivalent coverage under paragraph (2) must provide at least 
essential health benefits as described in section 1302(b) of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
"(6) Mental health services parity. — 

"(A) In general. — In the case of any benchmark ben- 
efit package under paragraph (1) or benchmark equivalent 
coverage under paragraph (2) that is offered by an entity 
that is not a medicaid managed care organization and that 
provides both medical and surgical benefits and mental 
health or substance use disorder benefits, the entity shall 
ensure that the financial requirements and treatment limi- 
tations applicable to such mental health or substance use 
disorder benefits comply with the requirements of section 
2705(a) of the Public Health Service Act in the same man- 
ner as such requirements apply to a group health plan. 

"(B) Deemed compliance. — Coverage provided with 
respect to an individual described in section 1905(a)(4)(B) 
and covered under the State plan under section 
1902(a)(10)(A) of the services described in section 
1905(a)(4)(B) (relating to early and periodic screening, di- 
agnostic, and treatment services defined in section 1905(r)) 
and provided in accordance with section 1902(a)(43), shall 
be deemed to satisfy the requirements of subparagraph 
(A).". 

(d) Annual Reports on Medicaid Enrollment. — 

(1) State reports. — Section 1902(a) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)), as amended by subsection (b), is 
amended — 

(A) by striking "and" at the end of paragraph (73); 

(B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (74) 
and inserting "; and"; and 

(C) by inserting after paragraph (74) the following new 
paragraph: 

June 9, 2010 



185 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2001 



"(75) provide that, beginning January 2015, and annually 
thereafter, the State shall submit a report to the Secretary 
that contains — 

"(A) the total number of enrolled and newly enrolled 
individuals in the State plan or under a waiver of the plan 
for the fiscal year ending on September 30 of the preceding 
calendar year, disaggregated by population, including chil- 
dren, parents, nonpregnant childless adults, disabled indi- 
viduals, elderly individuals, and such other categories or 
sub-categories of individuals eligible for medical assistance 
under the State plan or under a waiver of the plan as the 
Secretary may require; 

"(B) a description, which may be specified by popu- 
lation, of the outreach and enrollment processes used by 
the State during such fiscal year; and 

"(C) any other data reporting determined necessary by 
the Secretary to monitor enrollment and retention of indi- 
viduals eligible for medical assistance under the State plan 
or under a waiver of the plan.". 

(2) Reports to congress. — Beginning April 2015, and an- 
nually thereafter, the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
shall submit a report to the appropriate committees of Con- 
gress on the total enrollment and new enrollment in Medicaid 
for the fiscal year ending on September 30 of the preceding cal- 
endar year on a national and State-by-State basis, and shall 
include in each such report such recommendations for adminis- 
trative or legislative changes to improve enrollment in the 
Medicaid program as the Secretary determines appropriate, 
(e) State Option for Coverage for Individuals With In- 
come That Exceeds 133 Percent of the Poverty Line. — 

(1) Coverage as optional categorically needy 
group.— Section 1902 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396a) is amended — 

(A) in subsection (a)(10)(A)(ii) — 

(i) in subclause (XVIII), by striking "or" at the 

end; 

(ii) in subclause (XIX), by adding "or" at the end; 

and 

(iii) by adding at the end the following new sub- 
clause: 

"(XX) beginning January 1, 2014, who are 
under 65 years of age and are not described in or 
enrolled under a previous subclause of this clause, 
and whose income (as determined under sub- 
section (e)(14)) exceeds 133 percent of the poverty 
line (as defined in section 2110(c)(5)) applicable to 
a family of the size involved but does not exceed 
the highest income eligibility level established 
under the State plan or under a waiver of the 
plan, subject to subsection (hh);" and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new subsection: 
"(hh)(l) A State may elect to phase-in the extension of eligi- 
bility for medical assistance to individuals described in subclause 
(XX) of subsection (a)(10)(A)(ii) based on the categorical group (in- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



186 



eluding nonpregnant childless adults) or income, so long as the 
State does not extend such eligibility to individuals described in 
such subclause with higher income before making individuals de- 
scribed in such subclause with lower income eligible for medical as- 
sistance. 

"(2) If an individual described in subclause (XX) of subsection 
(a)(10)(A)(ii) is the parent of a child who is under 19 years of age 
(or such higher age as the State may have elected) who is eligible 
for medical assistance under the State plan or under a waiver of 
such plan, the individual may not be enrolled under the State plan 
unless the individual's child is enrolled under the State plan or 
under a waiver of the plan or is enrolled in other health insurance 
coverage. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term 'parent' 
includes an individual treated as a caretaker relative for purposes 
of carrying out section 1931.". 

(2) Conforming amendments. — 

(A) Section 1905(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)), as 
amended by subsection (a)(5)(C), is amended in the matter 
preceding paragraph (1) — 

(i) by striking "or" at the end of clause (xiii); 

(ii) by inserting "or" at the end of clause (xiv); and 

(iii) by inserting after clause (xiv) the following: 
"(xv) individuals described in section 

1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XX),". 

(B) Section 1903(f)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396b(f)(4)) is amended by inserting 
"1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XX)," after "1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XIX),". 

(C) Section 1920(e) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-l(e)), 
as added by subsection (a)(4)(B), is amended by inserting 
"or clause (ii)(XX)" after "clause (i)(VIII)". 

SEC. 2002. INCOME ELIGIBILITY FOR NONELDERLY DETERMINED 
USING MODIFIED GROSS INCOME. 

(a) In General. — Section 1902(e) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396a(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"(14) Income determined using modified adjusted 
GROSS INCOME. — [As revised by section 1004(b)(1)(A) &amp; 1004(e) 
of HCERA] 

"(A) In general. — Notwithstanding subsection (r) or 
any other provision of this title, except as provided in sub- 
paragraph (D), for purposes of determining income eligi- 
bility for medical assistance under the State plan or under 
any waiver of such plan and for any other purpose applica- 
ble under the plan or waiver for which a determination of 
income is required, including with respect to the imposi- 
tion of premiums and cost-sharing, a State shall use the 
modified adjusted gross income of an individual and, in the 
case of an individual in a family greater than 1, the house- 
hold income of such family. A State shall establish income 
eligibility thresholds for populations to be eligible for med- 
ical assistance under the State plan or a waiver of the plan 
using modified adjusted gross income and household in- 
come that are not less than the effective income eligibility 
levels that applied under the State plan or waiver on the 
date of enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable 

June 9, 2010 



187 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2002 



Care Act. For purposes of complying with the maintenance 
of effort requirements under subsection (gg) during the 
transition to modified adjusted gross income and house- 
hold income, a State shall, working with the Secretary, es- 
tablish an equivalent income test that ensures individuals 
eligible for medical assistance under the State plan or 
under a waiver of the plan on the date of enactment of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, do not lose 
coverage under the State plan or under a waiver of the 
plan. The Secretary may waive such provisions of this title 
and title XXI as are necessary to ensure that States estab- 
lish income and eligibility determination systems that pro- 
tect beneficiaries. 

"(B) No income or expense disregards. — Subject to 
subparagraph (I), no type of expense, block, or other in- 
come disregard shall be applied by a State to determine in- 
come eligibility for medical assistance under the State plan 
or under any waiver of such plan or for any other purpose 
applicable under the plan or waiver for which a determina- 
tion of income is required. 

"(C) No assets test. — A State shall not apply any as- 
sets or resources test for purposes of determining eligi- 
bility for medical assistance under the State plan or under 
a waiver of the plan. 

"(D) Exceptions. — 

"(i) Individuals eligible because of other aid 

OR ASSISTANCE, ELDERLY INDIVIDUALS, MEDICALLY 
NEEDY INDIVIDUALS, AND INDIVIDUALS ELIGIBLE FOR 

medicare cost-sharing. — Subparagraphs (A), (B), 
and (C) shall not apply to the determination of eligi- 
bility under the State plan or under a waiver for med- 
ical assistance for the following: 

"(I) Individuals who are eligible for medical 
assistance under the State plan or under a waiver 
of the plan on a basis that does not require a de- 
termination of income by the State agency admin- 
istering the State plan or waiver, including as a 
result of eligibility for, or receipt of, other Federal 
or State aid or assistance, individuals who are eli- 
gible on the basis of receiving (or being treated as 
if receiving) supplemental security income benefits 
under title XVI, and individuals who are eligible 
as a result of being or being deemed to be a child 
in foster care under the responsibility of the State. 
"(II) Individuals who have attained age 65. 
"(Ill) Individuals who qualify for medical as- 
sistance under the State plan or under any waiver 
of such plan on the basis of being blind or disabled 
(or being treated as being blind or disabled) with- 
out regard to whether the individual is eligible for 
supplemental security income benefits under title 
XVI on the basis of being blind or disabled and in- 
cluding an individual who is eligible for medical 
assistance on the basis of section 1902(e)(3). 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



188 



"(IV) Individuals described in subsection 
(aXlOXC). 

"(V) Individuals described in any clause of 
subsection (a)(10)(E). 

"(ii) Express lane agency findings. — In the case 
of a State that elects the Express Lane option under 
paragraph (13), notwithstanding subparagraphs (A), 
(B), and (C), the State may rely on a finding made by 
an Express Lane agency in accordance with that para- 
graph relating to the income of an individual for pur- 
poses of determining the individual's eligibility for 
medical assistance under the State plan or under a 
waiver of the plan. 

"(hi) Medicare prescription drug subsidies de- 
terminations. — Subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) shall 
not apply to any determinations of eligibility for pre- 
mium and cost-sharing subsidies under and in accord- 
ance with section 1860D-14 made by the State pursu- 
ant to section 1935(a)(2). 

"(iv) Long-term care. — Subparagraphs (A), (B), 
and (C) shall not apply to any determinations of eligi- 
bility of individuals for purposes of medical assistance 
for nursing facility services, a level of care in any in- 
stitution equivalent to that of nursing facility services, 
home or community-based services furnished under a 
waiver or State plan amendment under section 1915 
or a waiver under section 1115, and services described 
in section 1917(c)(l)(C)(ii). 

"(v) Grandfather of current enrollees until 

DATE OF NEXT REGULAR REDETERMINATION. — An indi- 
vidual who, on January 1, 2014, is enrolled in the 
State plan or under a waiver of the plan and who 
would be determined ineligible for medical assistance 
solely because of the application of the modified ad- 
justed gross income or household income standard de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A), shall remain eligible for 
medical assistance under the State plan or waiver 
(and subject to the same premiums and cost-sharing 
as applied to the individual on that date) through 
March 31, 2014, or the date on which the individual's 
next regularly scheduled redetermination of eligibility 
is to occur, whichever is later. 

"(E) Transition planning and oversight. — Each 
State shall submit to the Secretary for the Secretary's ap- 
proval the income eligibility thresholds proposed to be es- 
tablished using modified adjusted gross income and house- 
hold income, the methodologies and procedures to be used 
to determine income eligibility using modified adjusted 
gross income and household income and, if applicable, a 
State plan amendment establishing an optional eligibility 
category under subsection (a)(10)(A)(ii)(XX). To the extent 
practicable, the State shall use the same methodologies 
and procedures for purposes of making such determina- 
tions as the State used on the date of enactment of the Pa- 
June 9, 2010 



189 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2002 



tient Protection and Affordable Care Act. The Secretary 
shall ensure that the income eligibility thresholds pro- 
posed to be established using modified adjusted gross in- 
come and household income, including under the eligibility 
category established under subsection (a)(10)(A)(ii)(XX), 
and the methodologies and procedures proposed to be used 
to determine income eligibility, will not result in children 
who would have been eligible for medical assistance under 
the State plan or under a waiver of the plan on the date 
of enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act no longer being eligible for such assistance. 

"(F) Limitation on secretarial authority. — The 
Secretary shall not waive compliance with the require- 
ments of this paragraph except to the extent necessary to 
permit a State to coordinate eligibility requirements for 
dual eligible individuals (as denned in section 
1915(h)(2)(B)) under the State plan or under a waiver of 
the plan and under title XVIII and individuals who require 
the level of care provided in a hospital, a nursing facility, 
or an intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded. 

"(G) Definitions of modified adjusted gross in- 
come and household income. — In this paragraph, the 
terms 'modified adjusted gross income' and 'household in- 
come' have the meanings given such terms in section 
36B(d)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. 

"(H) Continued application of medicaid rules re- 
garding POINT-IN-TIME INCOME AND SOURCES OF IN- 
COME. — The requirement under this paragraph for States 
to use modified adjusted gross income and household in- 
come to determine income eligibility for medical assistance 
under the State plan or under any waiver of such plan and 
for any other purpose applicable under the plan or waiver 
for which a determination of income is required shall not 
be construed as affecting or limiting the application of — 

"(i) the requirement under this title and under the 
State plan or a waiver of the plan to determine an in- 
dividual's income as of the point in time at which an 
application for medical assistance under the State 
plan or a waiver of the plan is processed; or 

"(ii) any rules established under this title or under 
the State plan or a waiver of the plan regarding 
sources of countable income. 

"(I) Treatment of portion of modified adjusted 
GROSS INCOME. — [As added by section 1004(e)(2) of 
HCERA\ For purposes of determining the income eligi- 
bility of an individual for medical assistance whose eligi- 
bility is determined based on the application of modified 
adjusted gross income under subparagraph (A), the State 
shall— 

"(i) determine the dollar equivalent of the dif- 
ference between the upper income limit on eligibility 
for such an individual (expressed as a percentage of 
the poverty line) and such upper income limit in- 
creased by 5 percentage points; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2003 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



190 



"(ii) notwithstanding the requirement in subpara- 
graph (A) with respect to use of modified adjusted 
gross income, utilize as the applicable income of such 
individual, in determining such income eligibility, an 
amount equal to the modified adjusted gross income 
applicable to such individual reduced by such dollar 
equivalent amount.". 

(b) Conforming Amendment. — Section 1902(a)(17) of such Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(17)) is amended by inserting "(e)(14)," before 
"(1X3)". 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by subsections 
(a) and (b) take effect on January 1, 2014. 

SEC. 2003. REQUIREMENT TO OFFER PREMIUM ASSISTANCE FOR EM- 
PLOYER-SPONSORED INSURANCE. 

(a) In General.— Section 1906A of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396e- 
1) is amended — 

(1) in subsection (a) — 

(A) by striking "may elect to" and inserting "shall"; 
[Subparagraph (B) of section 10203(b)(2), p. 849, provides: 

"This Act shall be applied without regard to subparagraph (A) of 
section 2003(a)(1) of this Act and that subparagraph and the 
amendment made by that subparagraph are hereby deemed null, 
void, and of no effect. "] 

(B) by striking "under age 19"; and 

(C) by inserting ", in the case of an individual under 
age 19," after "(and"; 

(2) in subsection (c), in the first sentence, by striking 
"under age 19"; and 

(3) in subsection (d) — 

(A) in paragraph (2) — 

(i) in the first sentence, by striking "under age 
19"; and 

(ii) by striking the third sentence and inserting "A 
State may not require, as a condition of an individual 
(or the individual's parent) being or remaining eligible 
for medical assistance under this title, that the indi- 
vidual (or the individual's parent) apply for enrollment 
in qualified employer-sponsored coverage under this 
section."; and 

(B) in paragraph (3), by striking "the parent of an in- 
dividual under age 19" and inserting "an individual (or the 
parent of an individual)"; and 

(4) in subsection (e), by striking "under age 19" each place 
it appears. 

(b) Conforming Amendment. — The heading for section 1906A 
of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396e-l) is amended by striking "option 
for children". 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
take effect on January 1, 2014. 



191 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2005 



SEC. 2004. MEDICAID COVERAGE FOR FORMER FOSTER CARE CHIL- 
DREN. 

(a) In General.— Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a), as amended by section 2001(a)(1), is 
amended — 

(1) by striking "or" at the end of subclause (VII); 

(2) by adding "or" at the end of subclause (VIII); and 

(3) by inserting after subclause (VIII) the following: 

"(IX) [Replaced by section 10201(a)(l)~\ who— 
"(aa) are under 26 years of age; 
"(bb) are not described in or enrolled 
under any of subclauses (I) through (VII) of 
this clause or are described in any of such 
subclauses but have income that exceeds the 
level of income applicable under the State 
plan for eligibility to enroll for medical assist- 
ance under such subclause; 

"(cc) were in foster care under the respon- 
sibility of the State on the date of attaining 
18 years of age or such higher age as the 
State has elected under section 475(8)(B)(iii); 
and 

"(dd) were enrolled in the State plan 
under this title or under a waiver of the plan 
while in such foster care;". 
[Section 10201(a)(2), p. 839, provides a related amendment to 
section 1902(a)(10) of the SSA] 

(b) Option To Provide Presumptive Eligibility. — Section 
1920(e) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-l(e)), as added by section 
2001(a)(4)(B) and amended by section 2001(e)(2)(C), is amended by 
inserting ", clause (i)(LX)," after "clause (i)(VIII)". 

(c) Conforming Amendments. — 

(1) Section 1903(f)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(f)(4)), as 
amended by section 2001(a)(5)(D), is amended by inserting 
"1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IX)," after "1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII),". 

(2) Section 1937(a)(2)(B)(viii) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396u-7(a)(2)(B)(viii)) is amended by inserting ", or the indi- 
vidual qualifies for medical assistance on the basis of section 
1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IX)" before the period. 

[Additional conforming amendments relating to section 
1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IX) are in section 10201(c)(1), p. 8401 

(d) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
take effect on January 1, 2014. [As revised by section 10201(a)(3)~\ 

SEC. 2005. PAYMENTS TO TERRITORIES. 

(a) Increase in Limit on Payments. — Section 1108(g) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1308(g)) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (2), in the matter preceding subparagraph 
(A), by striking "paragraph (3)" and inserting "paragraphs (3) 
and (5)"; 

(2) in paragraph (4), by striking "and (3)" and inserting 
"(3), and (4)"; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following paragraph: 

"(5) Additional increase. — [Replaced by section 
1204(b)(1)(B) of HCERA~\ The Secretary shall increase the 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2006 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



192 



amounts otherwise determined under this subsection for Puer- 
to Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, the Northern Mariana Is- 
lands, and American Samoa (after the application of subsection 
(f) and the preceding paragraphs of this subsection) for the pe- 
riod beginning July 1, 2011, and ending on September 30, 
2019, by such amounts that the total additional payments 
under title XIX to such territories equals $6,300,000,000 for 
such period. The Secretary shall increase such amounts in pro- 
portion to the amounts applicable to such territories under this 
subsection and subsection (f) on the date of enactment of this 
paragraph.". 

[Subsection (b) repealed by section 1204(b)(2)(A) of HCERA] 
(c) Increased FMAP. — 

(1) In general. — The first sentence of section 1905(b) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(b)) is amended by 
striking "shall be 50 per centum" and inserting "shall be 55 
percent". 

(2) Effective date. — The amendment made by paragraph 
(1) takes effect on July 1, 2011. [As revised by section 
1204(b)(2)(B)of HCERA] 

SEC. 2006. SPECIAL ADJUSTMENT TO FMAP DETERMINATION FOR 
CERTAIN STATES RECOVERING FROM A MAJOR DIS- 
ASTER. 

Section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d), as 
amended by sections 2001(a)(3) and 2001(b)(2), is amended — 

(1) in subsection (b), in the first sentence, by striking "sub- 
section (y)" and inserting "subsections (y) and (aa)"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: 
"(aa)(l) Notwithstanding subsection (b), beginning January 1, 

2011, the Federal medical assistance percentage for a fiscal year 
for a disaster-recovery FMAP adjustment State shall be equal to 
the following: 

"(A) In the case of the first fiscal year (or part of a fiscal 
year) for which this subsection applies to the State, the Fed- 
eral medical assistance percentage determined for the fiscal 
year without regard to this subsection, subsection (y), sub- 
section (z), and section 10202 of the Patient Protection and Af- 
fordable Care Act, increased by 50 percent of the number of 
percentage points by which the Federal medical assistance per- 
centage determined for the State for the fiscal year without re- 
gard to this subsection and subsection (y), is less than the Fed- 
eral medical assistance percentage determined for the State for 
the preceding fiscal year after the application of only sub- 
section (a) of section 5001 of Public Law 111-5 (if applicable 
to the preceding fiscal year) and without regard to this sub- 
section, subsection (y), and subsections (b) and (c) of section 
5001 of Public Law 111-5. 

"(B) In the case of the second or any succeeding fiscal year 
for which this subsection applies to the State, the Federal med- 
ical assistance percentage determined for the preceding fiscal 
year under this subsection for the State, increased by 25 per- 
cent of the number of percentage points by which the Federal 
medical assistance percentage determined for the State for the 
fiscal year without regard to this subsection, subsection (y), 

June 9, 2010 



193 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2007 



subsection (z), and section 10202 of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act, is less than the Federal medical assist- 
ance percentage determined for the State for the preceding fis- 
cal year under this subsection. 

"(2) In this subsection, the term 'disaster-recovery FMAP ad- 
justment State' means a State that is one of the 50 States or the 
District of Columbia, for which, at any time during the preceding 
7 fiscal years, the President has declared a major disaster under 
section 401 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emer- 
gency Assistance Act and determined as a result of such disaster 
that every county or parish in the State warrant individual and 
public assistance or public assistance from the Federal Government 
under such Act and for which — 

"(A) in the case of the first fiscal year (or part of a fiscal 
year) for which this subsection applies to the State, the Fed- 
eral medical assistance percentage determined for the State for 
the fiscal year without regard to this subsection, subsection (y), 
subsection (z), and section 10202 of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act, is less than the Federal medical assist- 
ance percentage determined for the State for the preceding fis- 
cal year after the application of only subsection (a) of section 
5001 of Public Law 111-5 (if applicable to the preceding fiscal 
year) and without regard to this subsection, subsection (y), and 
subsections (b) and (c) of section 5001 of Public Law 111-5, by 
at least 3 percentage points; and 

"(B) in the case of the second or any succeeding fiscal year 
for which this subsection applies to the State, the Federal med- 
ical assistance percentage determined for the State for the fis- 
cal year without regard to this subsection, subsection (y), sub- 
section (z), and section 10202 of the Patient Protection and Af- 
fordable Care Act, is less than the Federal medical assistance 
percentage determined for the State for the preceding fiscal 
year under this subsection by at least 3 percentage points. 
"(3) The Federal medical assistance percentage determined for 
a disaster-recovery FMAP adjustment State under paragraph (1) 
shall apply for purposes of this title (other than with respect to dis- 
proportionate share hospital payments described in section 1923 
and payments under this title that are based on the enhanced 
FMAP described in 2105(b)) and shall not apply with respect to 
payments under title IV (other than under part E of title IV) or 
payments under title XXL". 

SEC. 2007. MEDICAID IMPROVEMENT FUND RESCISSION. 

(a) Rescission. — Any amounts available to the Medicaid Im- 
provement Fund established under section 1941 of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1396w-l) for any of fiscal years 2014 through 
2018 that are available for expenditure from the Fund and that are 
not so obligated as of the date of the enactment of this Act are re- 
scinded. 

(b) Conforming Amendments. — Section 1941(b)(1) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396w-l(b)(D) is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (A), by striking "$100,000,000" and in- 
serting "$0"; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2101 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



194 



(2) in subparagraph (B), by striking "$150,000,000" and in- 
serting "$0". 

Subtitle B — Enhanced Support for the 
Children's Health Insurance Program 

SEC. 2101. ADDITIONAL FEDERAL FINANCIAL PARTICIPATION FOR 
CHIP. 

(a) In General. — Section 2105(b) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397ee(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following: 
[As revised by section 10203(c)(l)~\ "Notwithstanding the preceding 
sentence, during the period that begins on October 1, 2015, and 
ends on September 30, 2019, the enhanced FMAP determined for 
a State for a fiscal year (or for any portion of a fiscal year occurring 
during such period) shall be increased by 23 percentage points, but 
in no case shall exceed 100 percent. The increase in the enhanced 
FMAP under the preceding sentence shall not apply with respect 
to determining the payment to a State under subsection (a)(1) for 
expenditures described in subparagraph (D)(iv), paragraphs (8), (9), 
(11) of subsection (c), or clause (4) of the first sentence of section 
1905(b).". 

(b) Maintenance of Effort. — 

(1) In general. — Section 2105(d) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1397ee(d)) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing: 

"(3) Continuation of eligibility standards for chil- 
dren UNTIL OCTOBER 1, 2019. — 

"(A) In general. — [As revised by section 
10203(cX2)(A)(i)~\ During the period that begins on the 
date of enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act and ends on September 30, 2019, as a condition 
of receiving payments under section 1903(a), a State shall 
not have in effect eligibility standards, methodologies, or 
procedures under its State child health plan (including any 
waiver under such plan) for children (including children 
provided medical assistance for which payment is made 
under section 2105(a)(1)(A)) that are more restrictive than 
the eligibility standards, methodologies, or procedures, re- 
spectively, under such plan (or waiver) as in effect on the 
date of enactment of that Act. The preceding sentence 
shall not be construed as preventing a State during such 
period from — 

"(i) applying eligibility standards, methodologies, 
or procedures for children under the State child health 
plan or under any waiver of the plan that are less re- 
strictive than the eligibility standards, methodologies, 
or procedures, respectively, for children under the plan 
or waiver that are in effect on the date of enactment 
of such Act; [As revised by section 10203(c)(2)(A)(ii)~\ 

"(ii) after September 30, 2015, enrolling children 
eligible to be targeted low-income children under the 
State child health plan in a qualified health plan that 

June 9, 2010 



195 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2101 



has been certified by the Secretary under subpara- 
graph (C); or [As added by section 10203(c)(2)(A)(iv)] 
"(hi) imposing a limitation described in section 
2112(b)(7) for a fiscal year in order to limit expendi- 
tures under the State child health plan to those for 
which Federal financial participation is available 
under this section for the fiscal year. 
"(B) Assurance of exchange coverage for tar- 
geted LOW-INCOME CHILDREN UNABLE TO BE PROVIDED 
CHILD HEALTH ASSISTANCE AS A RESULT OF FUNDING SHORT- 
FALLS. — In the event that allotments provided under sec- 
tion 2104 are insufficient to provide coverage to all chil- 
dren who are eligible to be targeted low-income children 
under the State child health plan under this title, a State 
shall establish procedures to ensure that such children are 
screened for eligibility for medical assistance under the 
State plan under title XIX or a waiver of that plan and, 
if found eligible, enrolled in such plan or a waiver. In the 
case of such children who, as a result of such screening, 
are determined to not be eligible for medical assistance 
under the State plan or a waiver under title XIX, the State 
shall establish procedures to ensure that the children are 
enrolled in a qualified health plan that has been certified 
by the Secretary under subparagraph (C) and is offered 
through an Exchange established by the State under sec- 
tion 1311 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act. For purposes of eligibility for premium assistance for 
the purchase of a qualified health plan under section 36B 
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and reduced cost- 
sharing under section 1402 of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act, children described in the preceding 
sentence shall be deemed to be ineligible for coverage 
under the State child health plan. [As revised by sections 
10201(g) and 10203(c)(2)(B)] 

"(C) Certification of comparability of pediatric 

COVERAGE OFFERED BY QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS. — With 

respect to each State, the Secretary, not later than April 
1, 2015, shall review the benefits offered for children and 
the cost-sharing imposed with respect to such benefits by 
qualified health plans offered through an Exchange estab- 
lished by the State under section 1311 of the Patient Pro- 
tection and Affordable Care Act and shall certify those 
plans that offer benefits for children and impose cost-shar- 
ing with respect to such benefits that the Secretary deter- 
mines are at least comparable to the benefits offered and 
cost-sharing protections provided under the State child 
health plan. [As added by section 10203(c)(2)(C)Y '. 
(2) Conforming amendment to title xxi medicaid main- 
tenance of effort. — Section 2105(d)(1) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1397ee(d)(l)) is amended by adding before the 
period ", except as required under section 1902(e)(14)". 
(c) No Enrollment Bonus Payments for Children En- 
rolled After Fiscal Year 2013.— Section 2105(a)(3)(F)(iii) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397ee(a)(3)(F)(iii)) is amended by 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2101 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



196 



inserting "or any children enrolled on or after October 1, 2013" be- 
fore the period. 

(d) Income Eligibility Determined Using Modified Gross 
Income. — 

(1) State plan requirement. — Section 2102(b)(1)(B) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397bb(b)(l)(B)) is amend- 
ed— 

(A) in clause (iii), by striking "and" after the semi- 
colon; 

(B) in clause (iv), by striking the period and inserting 
"; and"; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following: [As revised by 
section 1004(b)(2)(A) of HCERA~\ 

"(v) shall, beginning January 1, 2014, use modi- 
fied adjusted gross income and household income (as 
defined in section 36B(d)(2) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986) to determine eligibility for child health 
assistance under the State child health plan or under 
any waiver of such plan and for any other purpose ap- 
plicable under the plan or waiver for which a deter- 
mination of income is required, including with respect 
to the imposition of premiums and cost-sharing, con- 
sistent with section 1902(e)(14).". 

(2) Conforming amendment. — Section 2107(e)(1) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397gg(e)(l)) is amended— 

(A) by redesignating subparagraphs (E) through (L) as 
subparagraphs (F) through (M), respectively; and 

(B) by inserting after subparagraph (D), the following: 
"(E) Section 1902(e)(14) (relating to income determined 

using modified adjusted gross income and household in- 
come). [As revised by section 1004(b)(2)(B) of HCERAY. 

(e) Application of Streamlined Enrollment System. — Sec- 
tion 2107(e)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397gg(e)(l)), 
as amended by subsection (d)(2), is amended by adding at the end 
the following: 

"(N) Section 1943(b) (relating to coordination with 
State Exchanges and the State Medicaid agency).". 

(f) CHIP Eligibility for Children Ineligible for Medicaid 
as a Result of Elimination of Disregards. — Notwithstanding 
any other provision of law, a State shall treat any child who is de- 
termined to be ineligible for medical assistance under the State 
Medicaid plan or under a waiver of the plan as a result of the 
elimination of the application of an income disregard based on ex- 
pense or type of income, as required under section 1902(e)(14) of 
the Social Security Act (as added by this Act), as a targeted low- 
income child under section 2110(b) (unless the child is excluded 
under paragraph (2) of that section) and shall provide child health 
assistance to the child under the State child health plan (whether 
implemented under title XIX or XXI, or both, of the Social Security 
Act). 

[Additional CHIP amendments made by section 10203, p. 848~\ 

June 9, 2010 



197 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2102 



SEC. 2102. TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS. 

(a) CHIPRA. — Effective as if included in the enactment of the 
Children's Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2009 
(Public Law 111-3) (in this section referred to as "CHIPRA"): 

(1) Section 2104(m) of the Social Security Act, as added by 
section 102 of CHIPRA, is amended — 

(A) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8); 

and 

(B) by inserting after paragraph (6), the following: 
"(7) Adjustment of fiscal year 2010 allotments to ac- 
count FOR CHANGES IN PROJECTED SPENDING FOR CERTAIN PRE- 
VIOUSLY approved expansion programs. — For purposes of re- 
calculating the fiscal year 2010 allotment, in the case of one of 
the 50 States or the District of Columbia that has an approved 
State plan amendment effective January 1, 2006, to provide 
child health assistance through the provision of benefits under 
the State plan under title XIX for children from birth through 
age 5 whose family income does not exceed 200 percent of the 
poverty line, the Secretary shall increase the allotment by an 
amount that would be equal to the Federal share of expendi- 
tures that would have been claimed at the enhanced FMAP 
rate rather than the Federal medical assistance percentage 
matching rate for such population.". 

[Additional amendments to section 2104(m) of the SSA made 
by section 10203(d)(2), p. 849] 

(2) Section 605 of CHIPRA is amended by striking "legal 
residents" and insert "lawfully residing in the United States". 

(3) Subclauses (I) and (II) of paragraph (3)(C)(i) of section 
2105(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397ee(a)(3)(ii)), 
as added by section 104 of CHIPRA, are each amended by 
striking ", respectively". 

(4) Section 2105(a)(3)(E)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397ee(a)(3)(E)(ii)), as added by section 104 of CHIPRA, 
is amended by striking subclause (IV). 

(5) Section 2105(c)(9)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397e(c)(9)(B)), as added by section 211(c)(1) of 
CHIPRA, is amended by striking "section 1903(a)(3)(F)" and in- 
serting "section 1903(a)(3)(G)". 

(6) Section 2109(b)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397ii(b)(2)(B)), as added by section 602 of CHIPRA, is 
amended by striking "the child population growth factor under 
section 2104(m)(5)(B)" and inserting "a high-performing State 
under section 2111(b)(3)(B)". 

(7) Section 2110(c)(9)(B)(v) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397jj(c)(9)(B)(v)), as added by section 505(b) of 
CHIPRA, is amended by striking "school or school system" and 
inserting "local educational agency (as defined under section 
9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965". 

(8) Section 211(a)(1)(B) of CHIPRA is amended— 

(A) by striking "is amended" and all that follows 
through "adding" and inserting "is amended by adding"; 
and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2201 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



198 



(B) by redesignating the new subparagraph to be 
added by such section to section 1903(a)(3) of the Social 
Security Act as a new subparagraph (H). 
(b) ARRA. — Effective as if included in the enactment of section 
5006(a) of division B of the American Recovery and Reinvestment 
Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), the second sentence of section 
1916A(a)(l) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396o-l(a)(D) is 
amended by striking "or (i)" and inserting ", (i), or (j)". 

Subtitle C— Medicaid and CHIP 
Enrollment Simplification 

SEC. 2201. ENROLLMENT SIMPLIFICATION AND COORDINATION WITH 
STATE HEALTH INSURANCE EXCHANGES. 

Title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.) 
is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"SEC. 1943 [42 U.S.C. 1396w-3]. ENROLLMENT SIMPLIFICATION AND CO- 
ORDINATION WITH STATE HEALTH INSURANCE EX- 
CHANGES. 

"(a) Condition for Participation in Medicaid. — As a condi- 
tion of the State plan under this title and receipt of any Federal 
financial assistance under section 1903(a) for calendar quarters be- 
ginning after January 1, 2014, a State shall ensure that the re- 
quirements of subsection (b) is met. 

"(b) Enrollment Simplification and Coordination With 
State Health Insurance Exchanges and Chip. — 

"(1) In general. — A State shall establish procedures for — 
"(A) enabling individuals, through an Internet website 
that meets the requirements of paragraph (4), to apply for 
medical assistance under the State plan or under a waiver 
of the plan, to be enrolled in the State plan or waiver, to 
renew their enrollment in the plan or waiver, and to con- 
sent to enrollment or reenrollment in the State plan 
through electronic signature; 

"(B) enrolling, without any further determination by 
the State and through such website, individuals who are 
identified by an Exchange established by the State under 
section 1311 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act as being eligible for — 

"(i) medical assistance under the State plan or 
under a waiver of the plan; or 

"(ii) child health assistance under the State child 
health plan under title XXI; 

"(C) ensuring that individuals who apply for but are 
determined to be ineligible for medical assistance under 
the State plan or a waiver or ineligible for child health as- 
sistance under the State child health plan under title XXI, 
are screened for eligibility for enrollment in qualified 
health plans offered through such an Exchange and, if ap- 
plicable, premium assistance for the purchase of a quali- 
fied health plan under section 36B of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 (and, if applicable, advance payment of such 
assistance under section 1412 of the Patient Protection 

June 9, 2010 



199 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2201X1943 SSA 



and Affordable Care Act), and, if eligible, enrolled in such 
a plan without having to submit an additional or separate 
application, and that such individuals receive information 
regarding reduced cost-sharing for eligible individuals 
under section 1402 of the Patient Protection and Afford- 
able Care Act, and any other assistance or subsidies avail- 
able for coverage obtained through the Exchange; 

"(D) ensuring that the State agency responsible for ad- 
ministering the State plan under this title (in this section 
referred to as the 'State Medicaid agency'), the State agen- 
cy responsible for administering the State child health 
plan under title XXI (in this section referred to as the 
'State CHIP agency') and an Exchange established by the 
State under section 1311 of the Patient Protection and Af- 
fordable Care Act utilize a secure electronic interface suffi- 
cient to allow for a determination of an individual's eligi- 
bility for such medical assistance, child health assistance, 
or premium assistance, and enrollment in the State plan 
under this title, title XXI, or a qualified health plan, as ap- 
propriate; 

"(E) coordinating, for individuals who are enrolled in 
the State plan or under a waiver of the plan and who are 
also enrolled in a qualified health plan offered through 
such an Exchange, and for individuals who are enrolled in 
the State child health plan under title XXI and who are 
also enrolled in a qualified health plan, the provision of 
medical assistance or child health assistance to such indi- 
viduals with the coverage provided under the qualified 
health plan in which they are enrolled, including services 
described in section 1905(a)(4)(B) (relating to early and 
periodic screening, diagnostic, and treatment services de- 
fined in section 1905(r)) and provided in accordance with 
the requirements of section 1902(a)(43); and 

"(F) conducting outreach to and enrolling vulnerable 
and underserved populations eligible for medical assist- 
ance under this title XIX or for child health assistance 
under title XXI, including children, unaccompanied home- 
less youth, children and youth with special health care 
needs, pregnant women, racial and ethnic minorities, rural 
populations, victims of abuse or trauma, individuals with 
mental health or substance-related disorders, and individ- 
uals with HIV/AIDS. 

"(2) Agreements with state health insurance ex- 
changes. — The State Medicaid agency and the State CHIP 
agency may enter into an agreement with an Exchange estab- 
lished by the State under section 1311 of the Patient Protec- 
tion and Affordable Care Act under which the State Medicaid 
agency or State CHIP agency may determine whether a State 
resident is eligible for premium assistance for the purchase of 
a qualified health plan under section 36B of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986 (and, if applicable, advance payment of such 
assistance under section 1412 of the Patient Protection and Af- 
fordable Care Act), so long as the agreement meets such condi- 
tions and requirements as the Secretary of the Treasury may 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2202 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



200 



prescribe to reduce administrative costs and the likelihood of 
eligibility errors and disruptions in coverage. 

"(3) Streamlined enrollment system. — The State Med- 
icaid agency and State CHIP agency shall participate in and 
comply with the requirements for the system established under 
section 1413 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 
(relating to streamlined procedures for enrollment through an 
Exchange, Medicaid, and CHIP). 

"(4) Enrollment website requirements. — The proce- 
dures established by State under paragraph (1) shall include 
establishing and having in operation, not later than January 
1, 2014, an Internet website that is linked to any website of 
an Exchange established by the State under section 1311 of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and to the State 
CHIP agency (if different from the State Medicaid agency) and 
allows an individual who is eligible for medical assistance 
under the State plan or under a waiver of the plan and who 
is eligible to receive premium credit assistance for the pur- 
chase of a qualified health plan under section 36B of the Inter- 
nal Revenue Code of 1986 to compare the benefits, premiums, 
and cost-sharing applicable to the individual under the State 
plan or waiver with the benefits, premiums, and cost-sharing 
available to the individual under a qualified health plan of- 
fered through such an Exchange, including, in the case of a 
child, the coverage that would be provided for the child 
through the State plan or waiver with the coverage that would 
be provided to the child through enrollment in family coverage 
under that plan and as supplemental coverage by the State 
under the State plan or waiver. 

"(5) Continued need for assessment for home and 
community-based services. — Nothing in paragraph (1) shall 
limit or modify the requirement that the State assess an indi- 
vidual for purposes of providing home and community-based 
services under the State plan or under any waiver of such plan 
for individuals described in subsection (a)(10)(A)(ii)(VI).". 

sec. 2202. permitting hospitals to make presumptive eligi- 
bility determinations for all medicaid eligible 
populations. 

(a) In General. — Section 1902(a)(47) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396a(aX47)) is amended— 

(1) by striking "at the option of the State, provide" and in- 
serting "provide — 

"(A) at the option of the State,"; 

(2) by inserting "and" after the semicolon; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following: 

"(B) that any hospital that is a participating provider 
under the State plan may elect to be a qualified entity for 
purposes of determining, on the basis of preliminary infor- 
mation, whether any individual is eligible for medical as- 
sistance under the State plan or under a waiver of the 
plan for purposes of providing the individual with medical 
assistance during a presumptive eligibility period, in the 
same manner, and subject to the same requirements, as 
apply to the State options with respect to populations de- 
June 9, 2010 



201 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2301 



scribed in section 1920, 1920A, or 1920B (but without re- 
gard to whether the State has elected to provide for a pre- 
sumptive eligibility period under any such sections), sub- 
ject to such guidance as the Secretary shall establish;". 

(b) Conforming Amendment. — Section 1903(u)(l)(D)(v) of such 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(u)(l)(D)v)) is amended— 

(1) by striking "or for" and inserting "for"; and 

(2) by inserting before the period at the end the following: 
", or for medical assistance provided to an individual during a 
presumptive eligibility period resulting from a determination of 
presumptive eligibility made by a hospital that elects under 
section 1902(a)(47)(B) to be a qualified entity for such pur- 
pose". 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
take effect on January 1, 2014, and apply to services furnished on 
or after that date. 

Subtitle D — Improvements to Medicaid 

Services 

SEC. 2301. COVERAGE FOR FREESTANDING BIRTH CENTER SERVICES. 

(a) In General. — Section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396d), is amended— 

(1) in subsection (a) — 

(A) in paragraph (27), by striking "and" at the end; 

(B) by redesignating paragraph (28) as paragraph (29); 

and 

(C) by inserting after paragraph (27) the following new 
paragraph: 

"(28) freestanding birth center services (as defined in sub- 
section (1)(3)(A)) and other ambulatory services that are offered 
by a freestanding birth center (as defined in subsection 
(1)(3)(B)) and that are otherwise included in the plan; and"; and 

(2) in subsection (1), by adding at the end the following 
new paragraph: 

"(3)(A) The term 'freestanding birth center services' means 
services furnished to an individual at a freestanding birth center 
(as defined in subparagraph (B)) at such center. 

"(B) The term 'freestanding birth center' means a health facil- 
ity— 

"(i) that is not a hospital; 

"(ii) where childbirth is planned to occur away from the 
pregnant woman's residence; 

"(hi) that is licensed or otherwise approved by the State to 
provide prenatal labor and delivery or postpartum care and 
other ambulatory services that are included in the plan; and 

"(iv) that complies with such other requirements relating 
to the health and safety of individuals furnished services by 
the facility as the State shall establish. 

"(C) A State shall provide separate payments to providers ad- 
ministering prenatal labor and delivery or postpartum care in a 
freestanding birth center (as defined in subparagraph (B)), such as 
nurse midwives and other providers of services such as birth at- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2302 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



202 



tendants recognized under State law, as determined appropriate by 
the Secretary. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term 
'birth attendant' means an individual who is recognized or reg- 
istered by the State involved to provide health care at childbirth 
and who provides such care within the scope of practice under 
which the individual is legally authorized to perform such care 
under State law (or the State regulatory mechanism provided by 
State law), regardless of whether the individual is under the super- 
vision of, or associated with, a physician or other health care pro- 
vider. Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed as changing 
State law requirements applicable to a birth attendant.". 

(b) Conforming Amendment. — Section 1902(a)(10)(A) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)), is amended in the 
matter preceding clause (i) by striking "and (21)" and inserting ", 
(21), and (28)". 

(c) Effective Date. — 

(1) In general. — Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date 
of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to services fur- 
nished on or after such date. 

(2) Exception if state legislation required. — In the 
case of a State plan for medical assistance under title XIX of 
the Social Security Act which the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services determines requires State legislation (other 
than legislation appropriating funds) in order for the plan to 
meet the additional requirement imposed by the amendments 
made by this section, the State plan shall not be regarded as 
failing to comply with the requirements of such title solely on 
the basis of its failure to meet this additional requirement be- 
fore the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning after 
the close of the first regular session of the State legislature 
that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act. For 
purposes of the previous sentence, in the case of a State that 
has a 2-year legislative session, each year of such session shall 
be deemed to be a separate regular session of the State legisla- 
ture. 

SEC. 2302. CONCURRENT CARE FOR CHILDREN. 

(a) In General. — Section 1905(o)(l) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396d(oXD) is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (A), by striking "subparagraph (B)" 
and inserting "subparagraphs (B) and (C)"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: 
"(C) A voluntary election to have payment made for hospice 

care for a child (as defined by the State) shall not constitute a 
waiver of any rights of the child to be provided with, or to have 
payment made under this title for, services that are related to the 
treatment of the child's condition for which a diagnosis of terminal 

lllllGSS hclS fo©GI"l IXlEld© " 

(b) Application to CHIP.— Section 2110(a)(23) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397jj(a)(23)) is amended by inserting 
"(concurrent, in the case of an individual who is a child, with care 
related to the treatment of the child's condition with respect to 

June 9, 2010 



203 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2303 



which a diagnosis of terminal illness has been made" after "hospice 
care". 

SEC. 2303. STATE ELIGIBILITY OPTION FOR FAMILY PLANNING SERV- 
ICES. 

(a) Coverage as Optional Categorically Needy Group. — 

(1) In general.— Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)), as amended by sec- 
tion 2001(e), is amended — 

(A) in subclause (XIX), by striking "or" at the end; 

(B) in subclause (XX), by adding "or" at the end; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following new subclause: 

"(XXI) who are described in subsection (ii) (re- 
lating to individuals who meet certain income 
standards);". 

(2) Group described. — Section 1902 of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396a), as amended by section 2001(d), is amended by 
adding at the end the following new subsection: 

"(h)(1) Individuals described in this subsection are individ- 
uals — 

"(A) whose income does not exceed an income eligi- 
bility level established by the State that does not exceed 
the highest income eligibility level established under the 
State plan under this title (or under its State child health 
plan under title XXI) for pregnant women; and 

"(B) who are not pregnant. 
"(2) At the option of a State, individuals described in this 
subsection may include individuals who, had individuals ap- 
plied on or before January 1, 2007, would have been made eli- 
gible pursuant to the standards and processes imposed by that 
State for benefits described in clause (XV) of the matter fol- 
lowing subparagraph (G) of section subsection (a)(10) pursuant 
to a waiver granted under section 1115. 

"(3) At the option of a State, for purposes of subsection 
(a)(17)(B), in determining eligibility for services under this sub- 
section, the State may consider only the income of the appli- 
cant or recipient.". 

(3) Limitation on benefits. — Section 1902(a)(10) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)), as amended by 
section 2001(a)(5)(A), is amended in the matter following sub- 
paragraph (G) — 

(A) by striking "and (XV)" and inserting "(XV)"; and 

(B) by inserting ", and (XVI) the medical assistance 
made available to an individual described in subsection (ii) 
shall be limited to family planning services and supplies 
described in section 1905(a)(4)(C) including medical diag- 
nosis and treatment services that are provided pursuant to 
a family planning service in a family planning setting" be- 
fore the semicolon. 

(4) Conforming amendments. — 

(A) Section 1905(a) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396d(a)), as amended by section 2001(e)(2)(A), is 
amended in the matter preceding paragraph (1) — 

(i) in clause (xiv), by striking "or" at the end; 

(ii) in clause (xv), by adding "or" at the end; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2303U920C SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



204 



(iii) by inserting after clause (xv) the following: 
"(xvi) individuals described in section 1902(ii),". 
(B) Section 1903(f)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396b(f)(4)), as amended by section 2001(e)(2)(B), is 
amended by inserting "1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XXI)," after 
"1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XX),". 
(b) Presumptive Eligibility. — 

(1) In general. — Title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 
1920B the following: 

"presumptive eligibility for family planning services 

"Sec. 1920C [42 U.S.C. 1396r-lc]. (a) State Option.— State 
plan approved under section 1902 may provide for making medical 
assistance available to an individual described in section 1902(h) 
(relating to individuals who meet certain income eligibility stand- 
ard) during a presumptive eligibility period. In the case of an indi- 
vidual described in section 1902(h), such medical assistance shall 
be limited to family planning services and supplies described in 
1905(a)(4)(C) and, at the State's option, medical diagnosis and 
treatment services that are provided in conjunction with a family 
planning service in a family planning setting. 

"(b) Definitions. — For purposes of this section: 

"(1) Presumptive eligibility period. — The term 'pre- 
sumptive eligibility period' means, with respect to an indi- 
vidual described in subsection (a), the period that — 

"(A) begins with the date on which a qualified entity 
determines, on the basis of preliminary information, that 
the individual is described in section 1902(h); and 
"(B) ends with (and includes) the earlier of — 

"(i) the day on which a determination is made 
with respect to the eligibility of such individual for 
services under the State plan; or 

"(ii) in the case of such an individual who does not 
file an application by the last day of the month fol- 
lowing the month during which the entity makes the 
determination referred to in subparagraph (A), such 
last day. 
"(2) Qualified entity. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
term 'qualified entity' means any entity that — 

"(i) is eligible for payments under a State plan ap- 
proved under this title; and 

"(ii) is determined by the State agency to be capa- 
ble of making determinations of the type described in 
paragraph (1)(A). 

"(B) Rule of construction. — Nothing in this para- 
graph shall be construed as preventing a State from lim- 
iting the classes of entities that may become qualified enti- 
ties in order to prevent fraud and abuse. 

"(c) Administration. — 

"(1) In general. — The State agency shall provide qualified 

entities with — 

June 9, 2010 



205 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2303 



"(A) such forms as are necessary for an application to 
be made by an individual described in subsection (a) for 
medical assistance under the State plan; and 

"(B) information on how to assist such individuals in 
completing and filing such forms. 

"(2) Notification requirements. — A qualified entity that 
determines under subsection (b)(1)(A) that an individual de- 
scribed in subsection (a) is presumptively eligible for medical 
assistance under a State plan shall — 

"(A) notify the State agency of the determination with- 
in 5 working days after the date on which determination 
is made; and 

"(B) inform such individual at the time the determina- 
tion is made that an application for medical assistance is 
required to be made by not later than the last day of the 
month following the month during which the determina- 
tion is made. 

"(3) Application for medical assistance. — In the case of 
an individual described in subsection (a) who is determined by 
a qualified entity to be presumptively eligible for medical as- 
sistance under a State plan, the individual shall apply for med- 
ical assistance by not later than the last day of the month fol- 
lowing the month during which the determination is made. 
"(d) Payment. — Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
medical assistance that — 

"(1) is furnished to an individual described in subsection 
(a)- 

"(A) during a presumptive eligibility period; and 
"(B) by a entity that is eligible for payments under the 
State plan; and 

"(2) is included in the care and services covered by the 
State plan, 

shall be treated as medical assistance provided by such plan for 
purposes of clause (4) of the first sentence of section 1905(b).". 
(2) Conforming amendments. — 

(A) Section 1902(a)(47) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396a(a)(47)), as amended by section 2202(a), is 
amended — 

(i) in subparagraph (A), by inserting before the 
semicolon at the end the following: "and provide for 
making medical assistance available to individuals de- 
scribed in subsection (a) of section 1920C during a pre- 
sumptive eligibility period in accordance with such 
section"; and 

(ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking "or 1920B" 
and inserting "1920B, or 1920C". 

(B) Section 1903(u)(l)(D)(v) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396b(u)(l)(D)(v)), as amended by section 2202(b), is 
amended by inserting "or for medical assistance provided 
to an individual described in subsection (a) of section 
1920C during a presumptive eligibility period under such 
section," after "1920B during a presumptive eligibility pe- 
riod under such section,". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2304 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



206 



(c) Clarification of Coverage of Family Planning Serv- 
ices and Supplies— Section 1937(b) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396u-7(b)), as amended by section 2001(c), is amended by 
adding at the end the following: 

"(7) Coverage of family planning services and sup- 
plies. — Notwithstanding the previous provisions of this sec- 
tion, a State may not provide for medical assistance through 
enrollment of an individual with benchmark coverage or bench- 
mark-equivalent coverage under this section unless such cov- 
erage includes for any individual described in section 
1905(a)(4)(C), medical assistance for family planning services 
and supplies in accordance with such section.". 

(d) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply 
to items and services furnished on or after such date. 

SEC. 2304. CLARIFICATION OF DEFINITION OF MEDICAL ASSISTANCE. 

Section 1905(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)) 
is amended by inserting "or the care and services themselves, or 
both" before "(if provided in or after". 

Subtitle E — New Options for States to 
Provide Long-Term Services and Supports 



SEC. 2401. COMMUNITY FIRST CHOICE OPTION. 

Section 1915 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n) is 
amended by adding at the end the following: 

"(k) State Plan Option To Provide Home and Community- 
based Attendant Services and Supports. — 

"(1) In general. — [As revised by section 1205 of HCERA] 
Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection, begin- 
ning October 1, 2011, a State may provide through a State 
plan amendment for the provision of medical assistance for 
home and community-based attendant services and supports 
for individuals who are eligible for medical assistance under 
the State plan whose income does not exceed 150 percent of 
the poverty line (as defined in section 2110(c)(5)) or, if greater, 
the income level applicable for an individual who has been de- 
termined to require an institutional level of care to be eligible 
for nursing facility services under the State plan and with re- 
spect to whom there has been a determination that, but for the 
provision of such services, the individuals would require the 
level of care provided in a hospital, a nursing facility, an inter- 
mediate care facility for the mentally retarded, or an institu- 
tion for mental diseases, the cost of which could be reimbursed 
under the State plan, but only if the individual chooses to re- 
ceive such home and community-based attendant services and 
supports, and only if the State meets the following require- 
ments: 

"(A) Availability. — The State shall make available 
home and community-based attendant services and sup- 
ports to eligible individuals, as needed, to assist in accom- 
plishing activities of daily living, instrumental activities of 

June 9, 2010 



207 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2401 



daily living, and health-related tasks through hands-on as- 
sistance, supervision, or cueing — 

"(i) under a person-centered plan of services and 
supports that is based on an assessment of functional 
need and that is agreed to in writing by the individual 
or, as appropriate, the individual's representative; 

"(ii) in a home or community setting, which does 
not include a nursing facility, institution for mental 
diseases, or an intermediate care facility for the men- 
tally retarded; 

"(hi) under an agency-provider model or other 
model (as defined in paragraph (6)(C )); and 
"(iv) the furnishing of which — 

"(I) is selected, managed, and dismissed by 
the individual, or, as appropriate, with assistance 
from the individual's representative; 

"(II) is controlled, to the maximum extent pos- 
sible, by the individual or where appropriate, the 
individual's representative, regardless of who may 
act as the employer of record; and 

"(III) provided by an individual who is quali- 
fied to provide such services, including family 
members (as defined by the Secretary). 
"(B) Included services and supports. — In addition 
to assistance in accomplishing activities of daily living, in- 
strumental activities of daily living, and health related 
tasks, the home and community-based attendant services 
and supports made available include — 

"(i) the acquisition, maintenance, and enhance- 
ment of skills necessary for the individual to accom- 
plish activities of daily living, instrumental activities 
of daily living, and health related tasks; 

"(ii) back-up systems or mechanisms (such as the 
use of beepers or other electronic devices) to ensure 
continuity of services and supports; and 

"(hi) voluntary training on how to select, manage, 
and dismiss attendants. 

"(C) Excluded services and supports. — Subject to 
subparagraph (D), the home and community-based attend- 
ant services and supports made available do not include — 
"(i) room and board costs for the individual; 
"(ii) special education and related services pro- 
vided under the Individuals with Disabilities Edu- 
cation Act and vocational rehabilitation services pro- 
vided under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973; 

"(hi) assistive technology devices and assistive 
technology services other than those under (l)(B)(ii); 
"(iv) medical supplies and equipment; or 
"(v) home modifications. 
"(D) Permissible services and supports. — The home 
and community-based attendant services and supports 
may include — 

"(i) expenditures for transition costs such as rent 
and utility deposits, first month's rent and utilities, 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2401 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



208 



bedding, basic kitchen supplies, and other necessities 
required for an individual to make the transition from 
a nursing facility, institution for mental diseases, or 
intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded to 
a community-based home setting where the individual 
resides; and 

"(ii) expenditures relating to a need identified in 
an individual's person-centered plan of services that 
increase independence or substitute for human assist- 
ance, to the extent that expenditures would otherwise 
be made for the human assistance. 
"(2) Increased federal financial participation. — For 
purposes of payments to a State under section 1903(a)(1), with 
respect to amounts expended by the State to provide medical 
assistance under the State plan for home and community- 
based attendant services and supports to eligible individuals in 
accordance with this subsection during a fiscal year quarter oc- 
curring during the period described in paragraph (1), the Fed- 
eral medical assistance percentage applicable to the State (as 
determined under section 1905(b)) shall be increased by 6 per- 
centage points. 

"(3) State requirements. — In order for a State plan 
amendment to be approved under this subsection, the State 
shall— 

"(A) develop and implement such amendment in col- 
laboration with a Development and Implementation Coun- 
cil established by the State that includes a majority of 
members with disabilities, elderly individuals, and their 
representatives and consults and collaborates with such in- 
dividuals; 

"(B) provide consumer controlled home and commu- 
nity-based attendant services and supports to individuals 
on a statewide basis, in a manner that provides such serv- 
ices and supports in the most integrated setting appro- 
priate to the individual's needs, and without regard to the 
individual's age, type or nature of disability, severity of 
disability, or the form of home and community-based at- 
tendant services and supports that the individual requires 
in order to lead an independent life; 

"(C) with respect to expenditures during the first full 
fiscal year in which the State plan amendment is imple- 
mented, maintain or exceed the level of State expenditures 
for medical assistance that is provided under section 
1905(a), section 1915, section 1115, or otherwise to individ- 
uals with disabilities or elderly individuals attributable to 
the preceding fiscal year; 

"(D) establish and maintain a comprehensive, contin- 
uous quality assurance system with respect to community- 
based attendant services and supports that — 

"(i) includes standards for agency-based and other 
delivery models with respect to training, appeals for 
denials and reconsideration procedures of an indi- 
vidual plan, and other factors as determined by the 
Secretary; 

June 9, 2010 



209 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2401 



"(ii) incorporates feedback from consumers and 
their representatives, disability organizations, pro- 
viders, families of disabled or elderly individuals, 
members of the community, and others and maximizes 
consumer independence and consumer control; 

"(hi) monitors the health and well-being of each 
individual who receives home and community-based 
attendant services and supports, including a process 
for the mandatory reporting, investigation, and resolu- 
tion of allegations of neglect, abuse, or exploitation in 
connection with the provision of such services and sup- 
ports; and 

"(iv) provides information about the provisions of 
the quality assurance required under clauses (i) 
through (iii) to each individual receiving such services; 
and 

"(E) collect and report information, as determined nec- 
essary by the Secretary, for the purposes of approving the 
State plan amendment, providing Federal oversight, and 
conducting an evaluation under paragraph (5)(A), includ- 
ing data regarding how the State provides home and com- 
munity-based attendant services and supports and other 
home and community-based services, the cost of such serv- 
ices and supports, and how the State provides individuals 
with disabilities who otherwise qualify for institutional 
care under the State plan or under a waiver the choice to 
instead receive home and community-based services in lieu 
of institutional care. 

"(4) Compliance with certain laws. — A State shall en- 
sure that, regardless of whether the State uses an agency-pro- 
vider model or other models to provide home and community- 
based attendant services and supports under a State plan 
amendment under this subsection, such services and supports 
are provided in accordance with the requirements of the Fair 
Labor Standards Act of 1938 and applicable Federal and State 
laws regarding — 

"(A) withholding and payment of Federal and State in- 
come and payroll taxes; 

"(B) the provision of unemployment and workers com- 
pensation insurance; 

"(C) maintenance of general liability insurance; and 
"(D) occupational health and safety. 
"(5) Evaluation, data collection, and report to con- 
gress— 

"(A) Evaluation. — The Secretary shall conduct an 
evaluation of the provision of home and community-based 
attendant services and supports under this subsection in 
order to determine the effectiveness of the provision of 
such services and supports in allowing the individuals re- 
ceiving such services and supports to lead an independent 
life to the maximum extent possible; the impact on the 
physical and emotional health of the individuals who re- 
ceive such services; and an comparative analysis of the 
costs of services provided under the State plan amendment 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2401 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



210 



under this subsection and those provided under institu- 
tional care in a nursing facility, institution for mental dis- 
eases, or an intermediate care facility for the mentally re- 
tarded. 

"(B) Data collection— The State shall provide the 
Secretary with the following information regarding the 
provision of home and community-based attendant services 
and supports under this subsection for each fiscal year for 
which such services and supports are provided: 

"(i) The number of individuals who are estimated 
to receive home and community-based attendant serv- 
ices and supports under this subsection during the fis- 
cal year. 

"(ii) The number of individuals that received such 
services and supports during the preceding fiscal year. 

"(hi) The specific number of individuals served by 
type of disability, age, gender, education level, and 
employment status. 

"(iv) Whether the specific individuals have been 
previously served under any other home and commu- 
nity based services program under the State plan or 
under a waiver. 

"(C) Reports— Not later than— 

"(i) December 31, 2013, the Secretary shall submit 
to Congress and make available to the public an in- 
terim report on the findings of the evaluation under 
subparagraph (A); and 

"(ii) December 31, 2015, the Secretary shall sub- 
mit to Congress and make available to the public a 
final report on the findings of the evaluation under 
subparagraph (A). 
"(6) Definitions. — In this subsection: 

"(A) Activities of daily living. — The term 'activities 
of daily living' includes tasks such as eating, toileting, 
grooming, dressing, bathing, and transferring. 

"(B) Consumer controlled. — The term 'consumer 
controlled' means a method of selecting and providing serv- 
ices and supports that allow the individual, or where ap- 
propriate, the individual's representative, maximum con- 
trol of the home and community-based attendant services 
and supports, regardless of who acts as the employer of 
record. 

"(C) Delivery models. — 

"(i) Agency-provider model. — The term 'agency- 
provider model' means, with respect to the provision of 
home and community-based attendant services and 
supports for an individual, subject to paragraph (4), a 
method of providing consumer controlled services and 
supports under which entities contract for the provi- 
sion of such services and supports. 

"(ii) Other models. — The term 'other models' 
means, subject to paragraph (4), methods, other than 
an agency-provider model, for the provision of con- 
sumer controlled services and supports. Such models 

June 9, 2010 



211 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2402 



may include the provision of vouchers, direct cash pay- 
ments, or use of a fiscal agent to assist in obtaining 
services. 

"(D) Health-related tasks. — The term 'health-re- 
lated tasks' means specific tasks related to the needs of an 
individual, which can be delegated or assigned by licensed 
health-care professionals under State law to be performed 
by an attendant. 

"(E) Individual's representative. — The term 'indi- 
vidual's representative' means a parent, family member, 
guardian, advocate, or other authorized representative of 
an individual 

"(F) Instrumental activities of daily living. — The 
term 'instrumental activities of daily living' includes (but 
is not limited to) meal planning and preparation, man- 
aging finances, shopping for food, clothing, and other es- 
sential items, performing essential household chores, com- 
municating by phone or other media, and traveling around 
and participating in the community.". 
[Note that section 10202, on p. 845, provides incentives for 

States to offer home and community -based services as long-term 

care alternative to nursing homes] 

SEC. 2402. REMOVAL OF BARRIERS TO PROVIDING HOME AND COM- 
MUNITY-BASED SERVICES. 

(a) Oversight and Assessment of the Administration of 
Home and Community-based Services. — The Secretary of Health 
and Human Services shall promulgate regulations to ensure that 
all States develop service systems that are designed to — 

(1) allocate resources for services in a manner that is re- 
sponsive to the changing needs and choices of beneficiaries re- 
ceiving non-institutionally-based long-term services and sup- 
ports (including such services and supports that are provided 
under programs other the State Medicaid program), and that 
provides strategies for beneficiaries receiving such services to 
maximize their independence, including through the use of cli- 
ent-employed providers; 

(2) provide the support and coordination needed for a bene- 
ficiary in need of such services (and their family caregivers or 
representative, if applicable) to design an individualized, self- 
directed, community-supported life; and 

(3) improve coordination among, and the regulation of, all 
providers of such services under federally and State-funded 
programs in order to — 

(A) achieve a more consistent administration of poli- 
cies and procedures across programs in relation to the pro- 
vision of such services; and 

(B) oversee and monitor all service system functions to 
assure — 

(i) coordination of, and effectiveness of, eligibility 
determinations and individual assessments; 

(ii) development and service monitoring of a com- 
plaint system, a management system, a system to 
qualify and monitor providers, and systems for role- 
setting and individual budget determinations; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2402 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



212 



(iii) an adequate number of qualified direct care 
workers to provide self-directed personal assistance 
services. 

(b) Additional State Options. — Section 1915(i) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n(i)) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new paragraphs: 

"(6) State option to provide home and community- 
based SERVICES TO INDIVIDUALS ELIGIBLE FOR SERVICES UNDER 
A WAIVER. — 

"(A) In general. — A State that provides home and 
community-based services in accordance with this sub- 
section to individuals who satisfy the needs-based criteria 
for the receipt of such services established under para- 
graph (1)(A) may, in addition to continuing to provide such 
services to such individuals, elect to provide home and 
community-based services in accordance with the require- 
ments of this paragraph to individuals who are eligible for 
home and community-based services under a waiver ap- 
proved for the State under subsection (c), (d), or (e) or 
under section 1115 to provide such services, but only for 
those individuals whose income does not exceed 300 per- 
cent of the supplemental security income benefit rate es- 
tablished by section 1611(b)(1). 

"(B) Application of same requirements for individ- 
uals satisfying needs-based criteria. — Subject to sub- 
paragraph (C), a State shall provide home and community- 
based services to individuals under this paragraph in the 
same manner and subject to the same requirements as 
apply under the other paragraphs of this subsection to the 
provision of home and community-based services to indi- 
viduals who satisfy the needs-based criteria established 
under paragraph (1)(A). 

"(C) Authority to offer different type, amount, 

DURATION, OR SCOPE OF HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED 

services. — A State may offer home and community-based 
services to individuals under this paragraph that differ in 
type, amount, duration, or scope from the home and com- 
munity-based services offered for individuals who satisfy 
the needs-based criteria established under paragraph 
(1)(A), so long as such services are within the scope of 
services described in paragraph (4)(B) of subsection (c) for 
which the Secretary has the authority to approve a waiver 
and do not include room or board. 

"(7) State option to offer home and community-based 
services to specific, targeted populations. — 

"(A) In general. — A State may elect in a State plan 
amendment under this subsection to target the provision 
of home and community-based services under this sub- 
section to specific populations and to differ the type, 
amount, duration, or scope of such services to such specific 
populations. 

"(B) 5-YEAR TERM. — 

"(i) In general. — An election by a State under 
this paragraph shall be for a period of 5 years. 

June 9, 2010 



213 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2402 



"(ii) Phase-in of services and eligibility per- 
mitted during initial 5-year period. — A State mak- 
ing an election under this paragraph may, during the 
first 5-year period for which the election is made, 
phase-in the enrollment of eligible individuals, or the 
provision of services to such individuals, or both, so 
long as all eligible individuals in the State for such 
services are enrolled, and all such services are pro- 
vided, before the end of the initial 5-year period. 
"(C) Renewal. — An election by a State under this 
paragraph may be renewed for additional 5-year terms if 
the Secretary determines, prior to beginning of each such 
renewal period, that the State has — 

"(i) adhered to the requirements of this subsection 
and paragraph in providing services under such an 
election; and 

"(ii) met the State's objectives with respect to 
quality improvement and beneficiary outcomes.". 

(c) Removal of Limitation on Scope of Services. — Para- 
graph (1) of section 1915(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396n(i)), as amended by subsection (a), is amended by striking "or 
such other services requested by the State as the Secretary may 
approve". 

(d) Optional Eligibility Category To Provide Full Med- 
icaid Benefits to Individuals Receiving Home and Community- 
based Services Under a State Plan Amendment. — 

(1) In general.— Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)), as amended by sec- 
tion 2304(a)(1), is amended — 

(A) in subclause (XX), by striking "or" at the end; 

(B) in subclause (XXI), by adding "or" at the end; and 

(C) by inserting after subclause (XXI), the following 
new subclause: 

"(XXII) who are eligible for home and commu- 
nity-based services under needs-based criteria es- 
tablished under paragraph (1)(A) of section 
1915(i), or who are eligible for home and commu- 
nity-based services under paragraph (6) of such 
section, and who will receive home and commu- 
nity-based services pursuant to a State plan 
amendment under such subsection;". 

(2) Conforming amendments. — 

(A) Section 1903(f)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396b(f)(4)), as amended by section 2304(a)(4)(B), is 
amended in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by in- 
serting "1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XXII)," after 
"1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XXI),". 

(B) Section 1905(a) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396d(a)), as so amended, is amended in the matter 
preceding paragraph (1) — 

(i) in clause (xv), by striking "or" at the end; 

(ii) in clause (xvi), by adding "or" at the end; and 

(iii) by inserting after clause (xvi) the following 
new clause: 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2403 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



214 



"(xvii) individuals who are eligible for home and commu- 
nity-based services under needs-based criteria established 
under paragraph (1)(A) of section 1915(i), or who are eligible 
for home and community-based services under paragraph (6) of 
such section, and who will receive home and community-based 
services pursuant to a State plan amendment under such sub- 
section,". 

(e) Elimination of Option To Limit Number of Eligible In- 
dividuals or Length of Period for Grandfathered Individ- 
uals if Eligibility Criteria Is Modified. — Paragraph (1) of sec- 
tion 1915(i) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n(i)) is amended— 

(1) by striking subparagraph (C) and inserting the fol- 
lowing: 

"(C) Projection of number of individuals to be 
provided home and community-based services. — The 
State submits to the Secretary, in such form and manner, 
and upon such frequency as the Secretary shall specify, 
the projected number of individuals to be provided home 
and community-based services."; and 

(2) in subclause (II) of subparagraph (D)(ii), by striking "to 
be eligible for such services for a period of at least 12 months 
beginning on the date the individual first received medical as- 
sistance for such services" and inserting "to continue to be eli- 
gible for such services after the effective date of the modifica- 
tion and until such time as the individual no longer meets the 
standard for receipt of such services under such pre-modified 
criteria". 

(f) Elimination of Option To Waive Statewideness; Addi- 
tion of Option To Waive Comparability. — Paragraph (3) of sec- 
tion 1915(i) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n(3)) is amended by striking 
"1902(a)(1) (relating to statewideness)" and inserting 
"1902(a)(10)(B) (relating to comparability)". 

(g) Effective Date. — The amendments made by subsections 
(b) through (f) take effect on the first day of the first fiscal year 
quarter that begins after the date of enactment of this Act. 

SEC. 2403. MONEY FOLLOWS THE PERSON REBALANCING DEM- 
ONSTRATION. 

(a) Extension of Demonstration. — 

(1) In general. — Section 6071(h) of the Deficit Reduction 
Act of 2005 (42 U.S.C. 1396a note) is amended— 

(A) in paragraph (1)(E), by striking "fiscal year 2011" 
and inserting "each of fiscal years 2011 through 2016"; and 

(B) in paragraph (2), by striking "2011" and inserting 
"2016". 

(2) Evaluation. — Paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 6071(g) 
of such Act is amended are each amended by striking "2011" 
and inserting "2016". 

(b) Reduction of Institutional Residency Period. — 

(1) In general.— Section 6071(b)(2) of the Deficit Reduc- 
tion Act of 2005 (42 U.S.C. 1396a note) is amended— 

(A) in subparagraph (A)(i), by striking ", for a period 
of not less than 6 months or for such longer minimum pe- 
riod, not to exceed 2 years, as may be specified by the 

June 9, 2010 



215 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2406 



State" and inserting "for a period of not less than 90 con- 
secutive days"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following: 
"Any days that an individual resides in an institution on the 
basis of having been admitted solely for purposes of receiving 
short-term rehabilitative services for a period for which pay- 
ment for such services is limited under title XVIII shall not be 
taken into account for purposes of determining the 90-day pe- 
riod required under subparagraph (A)(i).". 

(2) Effective date. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section take effect 30 days after the date of enactment of this 
Act. 

SEC. 2404. PROTECTION FOR RECIPIENTS OF HOME AND COMMUNITY- 
BASED SERVICES AGAINST SPOUSAL IMPOVERISHMENT. 

During the 5-year period that begins on January 1, 2014, sec- 
tion 1924(h)(1)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r- 
5(h)(1)(A)) shall be applied as though "is eligible for medical assist- 
ance for home and community-based services provided under sub- 
section (c), (d), or (i) of section 1915, under a waiver approved 
under section 1115, or who is eligible for such medical assistance 
by reason of being determined eligible under section 1902(a)(10)(C) 
or by reason of section 1902(f) or otherwise on the basis of a reduc- 
tion of income based on costs incurred for medical or other reme- 
dial care, or who is eligible for medical assistance for home and 
community-based attendant services and supports under section 
1915(k)" were substituted in such section for "(at the option of the 
State) is described in section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(VI)". 

SEC. 2405. FUNDING TO EXPAND STATE AGING AND DISABILITY RE- 
SOURCE CENTERS. 

Out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, 
there is appropriated to the Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices, acting through the Assistant Secretary for Aging, $10,000,000 
for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014, to carry out subsections 
(a)(20)(B)(iii) and (b)(8) of section 202 of the Older Americans Act 
of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3012). 

SEC. 2406. SENSE OF THE SENATE REGARDING LONG-TERM CARE. 

(a) Findings. — The Senate makes the following findings: 

(1) Nearly 2 decades have passed since Congress seriously 
considered long-term care reform. The United States Bipar- 
tisan Commission on Comprehensive Health Care, also know 
as the "Pepper Commission", released its "Call for Action" 
blueprint for health reform in September 1990. In the 20 years 
since those recommendations were made, Congress has never 
acted on the report. 

(2) In 1999, under the United States Supreme Court's deci- 
sion in Olmstead v. L.C., 527 U.S. 581 (1999), individuals with 
disabilities have the right to choose to receive their long-term 
services and supports in the community, rather than in an in- 
stitutional setting. 

(3) Despite the Pepper Commission and Olmstead decision, 
the long-term care provided to our Nation's elderly and dis- 
abled has not improved. In fact, for many, it has gotten far 
worse. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2501 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



216 



(4) In 2007, 69 percent of Medicaid long-term care spend- 
ing for elderly individuals and adults with physical disabilities 
paid for institutional services. Only 6 states spent 50 percent 
or more of their Medicaid long-term care dollars on home and 
community-based services for elderly individuals and adults 
with physical disabilities while Vi of the States spent less than 
25 percent. This disparity continues even though, on average, 
it is estimated that Medicaid dollars can support nearly 3 el- 
derly individuals and adults with physical disabilities in home 
and community-based services for every individual in a nurs- 
ing home. Although every State has chosen to provide certain 
services under home and community-based waivers, these serv- 
ices are unevenly available within and across States, and reach 
a small percentage of eligible individuals, 
(b) Sense of the Senate. — It is the sense of the Senate that — 

(1) during the 111th session of Congress, Congress should 
address long-term services and supports in a comprehensive 
way that guarantees elderly and disabled individuals the care 
they need; and 

(2) long term services and supports should be made avail- 
able in the community in addition to in institutions. 

Subtitle F — Medicaid Prescription Drug 

Coverage 

SEC. 2501. PRESCRIPTION DRUG REBATES. 

(a) Increase in Minimum Rebate Percentage for Single 
Source Drugs and Innovator Multiple Source Drugs. — 

(1) In general.— Section 1927(c)(1)(B) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(c)(l)(B)) is amended— 

(A) in clause (i) — 

(i) in subclause (IV), by striking "and" at the end; 

(ii) in subclause (V) — 

(I) by inserting "and before January 1, 2010" 
after "December 31, 1995,"; and 

(II) by striking the period at the end and in- 
serting "; and"; and 

(iii) by adding at the end the following new sub- 
clause: 

"(VI) except as provided in clause (iii), after 
December 31, 2009, 23.1 percent."; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new clause: 
"(iii) Minimum rebate percentage for certain 

drugs. — 

"(I) In general. — In the case of a single 
source drug or an innovator multiple source drug 
described in subclause (II), the minimum rebate 
percentage for rebate periods specified in clause 
(i)(VI) is 17.1 percent. 

"(II) Drug described. — For purposes of sub- 
clause (I), a single source drug or an innovator 
multiple source drug described in this subclause is 
any of the following drugs: 

June 9, 2010 



217 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2501 



"(aa) A clotting factor for which a sepa- 
rate furnishing payment is made under sec- 
tion 1842(o)(5) and which is included on a list 
of such factors specified and updated regu- 
larly by the Secretary. 

"(bb) A drug approved by the Food and 
Drug Administration exclusively for pediatric 
indications.". 

(2) Recapture of total savings due to increase. — Sec- 
tion 1927(b)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(b)(D) is amend- 
ed by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: 

"(C) Special rule for increased minimum rebate 

PERCENTAGE. — 

"(i) In general. — In addition to the amounts ap- 
plied as a reduction under subparagraph (B), for re- 
bate periods beginning on or after January 1, 2010, 
during a fiscal year, the Secretary shall reduce pay- 
ments to a State under section 1903(a) in the manner 
specified in clause (ii), in an amount equal to the prod- 
uct of — 

"(I) 100 percent minus the Federal medical 
assistance percentage applicable to the rebate pe- 
riod for the State; and 

"(II) the amounts received by the State under 
such subparagraph that are attributable (as esti- 
mated by the Secretary based on utilization and 
other data) to the increase in the minimum rebate 
percentage effected by the amendments made by 
subsections (a)(1), (b), and (d) of section 2501 of 
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 
taking into account the additional drugs included 
under the amendments made by subsection (c) of 
section 2501 of such Act. 
The Secretary shall adjust such payment reduction for 
a calendar quarter to the extent the Secretary deter- 
mines, based upon subsequent utilization and other 
data, that the reduction for such quarter was greater 
or less than the amount of payment reduction that 
should have been made. 

"(ii) Manner of payment reduction. — The 
amount of the payment reduction under clause (i) for 
a State for a quarter shall be deemed an overpayment 
to the State under this title to be disallowed against 
the State's regular quarterly draw for all Medicaid 
spending under section 1903(d)(2). Such a disallow- 
ance is not subject to a reconsideration under section 
1116(d).". 

(b) Increase in Rebate for Other Drugs. — Section 
1927(c)(3)(B) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(c)(3)(B)) is amended— 

(1) in clause (i), by striking "and" at the end; 

(2) in clause (ii) — 

(A) by inserting "and before January 1, 2010," after 
"December 31, 1993,"; and 

(B) by striking the period and inserting "; and"; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2501 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



218 



(3) by adding at the end the following new clause: 

"(hi) after December 31, 2009, is 13 percent.", 
(c) Extension of Prescription Drug Discounts to Enroll- 
ees of Medicaid Managed Care Organizations. — 

(1) In general.— Section 1903(m)(2)(A) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396b(m)(2)(A)) is amended— 

(A) in clause (xi), by striking "and" at the end; 

(B) in clause (xii), by striking the period at the end 
and inserting "; and"; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following: 

"(xiii) such contract provides that (I) covered out- 
patient drugs dispensed to individuals eligible for 
medical assistance who are enrolled with the entity 
shall be subject to the same rebate required by the 
agreement entered into under section 1927 as the 
State is subject to and that the State shall collect such 
rebates from manufacturers, (II) capitation rates paid 
to the entity shall be based on actual cost experience 
related to rebates and subject to the Federal regula- 
tions requiring actuarially sound rates, and (III) the 
entity shall report to the State, on such timely and 
periodic basis as specified by the Secretary in order to 
include in the information submitted by the State to 
a manufacturer and the Secretary under section 
1927(b)(2)(A), information on the total number of units 
of each dosage form and strength and package size by 
National Drug Code of each covered outpatient drug 
dispensed to individuals eligible for medical assistance 
who are enrolled with the entity and for which the en- 
tity is responsible for coverage of such drug under this 
subsection (other than covered outpatient drugs that 
under subsection (j)(l) of section 1927 are not subject 
to the requirements of that section) and such other 
data as the Secretary determines necessary to carry 
out this subsection.". 

(2) Conforming amendments. — Section 1927 (42 U.S.C. 
1396r-8) is amended — 

(A) in subsection (b) — 

(i) in paragraph (1)(A), in the first sentence, by in- 
serting ", including such drugs dispensed to individ- 
uals enrolled with a medicaid managed care organiza- 
tion if the organization is responsible for coverage of 
such drugs" before the period; and 

(ii) in paragraph (2)(A), by inserting "including 
such information reported by each medicaid managed 
care organization," after "for which payment was made 
under the plan during the period,"; and 

(B) in subsection (j), by striking paragraph (1) and in- 
serting the following: 

"(1) Covered outpatient drugs are not subject to the re- 
quirements of this section if such drugs are — 

"(A) dispensed by health maintenance organizations, 
including Medicaid managed care organizations that con- 
tract under section 1903(m); and 

June 9, 2010 



219 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2502 



"(B) subject to discounts under section 340B of the 
Public Health Service Act.". 

(d) Additional Rebate for New Formulations of Existing 
Drugs. — 

(1) In general— Section 1927(c)(2) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(c)(2)) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new subparagraph: 

"(C) Treatment of new formulations. — [Replaced 
by section 1206(a) of HCERA] In the case of a drug that 
is a line extension of a single source drug or an innovator 
multiple source drug that is an oral solid dosage form, the 
rebate obligation with respect to such drug under this sec- 
tion shall be the amount computed under this section for 
such new drug or, if greater, the product of — 

"(i) the average manufacturer price of the line ex- 
tension of a single source drug or an innovator mul- 
tiple source drug that is an oral solid dosage form; 

"(ii) the highest additional rebate (calculated as a 
percentage of average manufacturer price) under this 
section for any strength of the original single source 
drug or innovator multiple source drug; and 

"(hi) the total number of units of each dosage form 
and strength of the line extension product paid for 
under the State plan in the rebate period (as reported 
by the State). 

In this subparagraph, the term 'line extension' means, 
with respect to a drug, a new formulation of the drug, such 
as an extended release formulation.". 

(2) Effective date. — The amendment made by paragraph 
(1) shall apply to drugs that are paid for by a State after De- 
cember 31, 2009. 

(e) Maximum Rebate Amount. — Section 1927(c)(2) of such Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(c)(2)), as amended by subsection (d), is amend- 
ed by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: 

"(D) Maximum rebate amount. — In no case shall the 
sum of the amounts applied under paragraph (l)(A)(ii) and 
this paragraph with respect to each dosage form and 
strength of a single source drug or an innovator multiple 
source drug for a rebate period beginning after December 
31, 2009, exceed 100 percent of the average manufacturer 
price of the drug.". 

(f) Conforming Amendments. — 

(1) In general— Section 340B of the Public Health Serv- 
ice Act (42 U.S.C. 256b) is amended— 

(A) in subsection (a)(2)(B)(i), by striking "1927(c)(4)" 
and inserting "1927(c)(3)"; and 

(B) by striking subsection (c); and 

(C) redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (c). 

(2) Effective date. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section take effect on January 1, 2010. 

SEC. 2502. ELIMINATION OF EXCLUSION OF COVERAGE OF CERTAIN 
DRUGS. 

(a) In General. — Section 1927(d) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397r-8(d)) is amended— 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2503 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



220 



(1) in paragraph (2) — 

(A) by striking subparagraphs (E), (I), and (J), respec- 
tively; and 

(B) by redesignating subparagraphs (F), (G), (H), and 
(K) as subparagraphs (E), (F), (G), and (H), respectively; 
and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 

"(7) Non-excludable drugs. — The following drugs or 
classes of drugs, or their medical uses, shall not be excluded 
from coverage: 

"(A) Agents when used to promote smoking cessation, 
including agents approved by the Food and Drug Adminis- 
tration under the over-the-counter monograph process for 
purposes of promoting, and when used to promote, tobacco 
cessation. 

"(B) Barbiturates. 
"(C) Benzodiazepines.", 
(b) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 2014. 

SEC. 2503. PROVIDING ADEQUATE PHARMACY REIMBURSEMENT. 

(a) Pharmacy Reimbursement Limits. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1927(e) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(e)) is amended— 

(A) in paragraph (4), by striking "(or, effective January 
1, 2007, two or more)"; and 

(B) by striking paragraph (5) and inserting the fol- 
lowing: 

"(5) Use of amp in upper payment limits. — The Secretary 
shall calculate the Federal upper reimbursement limit estab- 
lished under paragraph (4) as no less than 175 percent of the 
weighted average (determined on the basis of utilization) of the 
most recently reported monthly average manufacturer prices 
for pharmaceutically and therapeutically equivalent multiple 
source drug products that are available for purchase by retail 
community pharmacies on a nationwide basis. The Secretary 
shall implement a smoothing process for average manufacturer 
prices. Such process shall be similar to the smoothing process 
used in determining the average sales price of a drug or bio- 
logical under section 1847A.". 

(2) Definition of amp— Section 1927(k)(l) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396r-8(k)(l)) is amended— 

(A) in subparagraph (A), by striking "by" and all that 
follows through the period and inserting "by — 

"(i) wholesalers for drugs distributed to retail com- 
munity pharmacies; and 

"(ii) retail community pharmacies that purchase 
drugs directly from the manufacturer."; and 

(B) by striking subparagraph (B) and inserting the fol- 
lowing: 

"(B) Exclusion of customary prompt pay discounts 

AND OTHER PAYMENTS. — 

"(i) In general. — The average manufacturer price 
for a covered outpatient drug shall exclude — 

June 9, 2010 



221 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2503 



"(I) customary prompt pay discounts extended 
to wholesalers; 

"(II) bona fide service fees paid by manufac- 
turers to wholesalers or retail community phar- 
macies, including (but not limited to) distribution 
service fees, inventory management fees, product 
stocking allowances, and fees associated with ad- 
ministrative services agreements and patient care 
programs (such as medication compliance pro- 
grams and patient education programs); 

"(III) reimbursement by manufacturers for re- 
called, damaged, expired, or otherwise unsalable 
returned goods, including (but not limited to) re- 
imbursement for the cost of the goods and any re- 
imbursement of costs associated with return goods 
handling and processing, reverse logistics, and 
drug destruction; 

"(IV) payments received from, and rebates or 
discounts provided to, pharmacy benefit man- 
agers, managed care organizations, health mainte- 
nance organizations, insurers, hospitals, clinics, 
mail order pharmacies, long term care providers, 
manufacturers, or any other entity that does not 
conduct business as a wholesaler or a retail com- 
munity pharmacy [error in final punctuation — 
amendment made by section 1101(c)(2) of HCERA 
only struck period and did not insert '; and'] 

"(V) discounts provided by manufacturers 
under section 1860D-14A. [As added by section 
1101(c)(3) of HCERA] 

"(ii) Inclusion of other discounts and pay- 
ments. — Notwithstanding clause (i), any other dis- 
counts, rebates, payments, or other financial trans- 
actions that are received by, paid by, or passed 
through to, retail community pharmacies shall be in- 
cluded in the average manufacturer price for a covered 
outpatient drug."; and 

(C) in subparagraph (C), by striking "the retail phar- 
macy class of trade" and inserting "retail community phar- 
macies". 

(3) Definition of multiple source drug. — Section 
1927(k)(7) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(k)(7)) is amended— 

(A) in subparagraph (A)(i)(III), by striking "the State" 
and inserting "the United States"; and 

(B) in subparagraph (C) — 

(i) in clause (i), by inserting "and" after the semi- 
colon; 

(ii) in clause (ii), by striking "; and" and inserting 
a period; and 

(iii) by striking clause (iii). 

(4) Definitions of retail community pharmacy; whole- 
saler.— Section 1927(k) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(k)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2503 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



222 



"(10) Retail community pharmacy. — The term 'retail 
community pharmacy' means an independent pharmacy, a 
chain pharmacy, a supermarket pharmacy, or a mass merchan- 
diser pharmacy that is licensed as a pharmacy by the State 
and that dispenses medications to the general public at retail 
prices. Such term does not include a pharmacy that dispenses 
prescription medications to patients primarily through the 
mail, nursing home pharmacies, long-term care facility phar- 
macies, hospital pharmacies, clinics, charitable or not-for-profit 
pharmacies, government pharmacies, or pharmacy benefit 
managers. 

"(11) Wholesaler. — The term 'wholesaler' means a drug 
wholesaler that is engaged in wholesale distribution of pre- 
scription drugs to retail community pharmacies, including (but 
not limited to) manufacturers, repackers, distributors, own- 
label distributors, private-label distributors, jobbers, brokers, 
warehouses (including manufacturer's and distributor's ware- 
houses, chain drug warehouses, and wholesale drug ware- 
houses) independent wholesale drug traders, and retail com- 
munity pharmacies that conduct wholesale distributions.". 

(b) Disclosure of Price Information to the Public. — Sec- 
tion 1927(b)(3) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(b)(3)) is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (A) — 

(A) in the first sentence, by inserting after clause (iii) 
the following: 

"(iv) not later than 30 days after the last day of 
each month of a rebate period under the agreement, 
on the manufacturer's total number of units that are 
used to calculate the monthly average manufacturer 
price for each covered outpatient drug;"; and 

(B) in the second sentence, by inserting "(relating to 
the weighted average of the most recently reported month- 
ly average manufacturer prices)" after "(D)(v)"; and 

(2) in subparagraph (D)(v), by striking "average manufac- 
turer prices" and inserting "the weighted average of the most 
recently reported monthly average manufacturer prices and 
the average retail survey price determined for each multiple 
source drug in accordance with subsection (f)". 

(c) Clarification of Application of Survey of Retail 
Prices.— Section 1927(f)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(b)(D) is 
amended — 

(1) in subparagraph (A)(i), by inserting "with respect to a 
retail community pharmacy," before "the determination"; and 

(2) in subparagraph (C)(ii), by striking "retail pharmacies" 
and inserting "retail community pharmacies". 

(d) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall take effect on the first day of the first calendar year quarter 
that begins at least 180 days after the date of enactment of this 
Act, without regard to whether or not final regulations to carry out 
such amendments have been promulgated by such date. 



223 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2551 



Subtitle G — Medicaid Disproportionate 
Share Hospital (DSH) Payments 

SEC. 2551. DISPROPORTIONATE SHARE HOSPITAL PAYMENTS. 

(a) In General. — Section 1923(f) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396r-4(f)) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (1), by striking "and (3)" and inserting ", 
(3), and (7)"; 

(2) in paragraph (3)(A), by striking "paragraph (6)" and in- 
serting "paragraphs (6) and (7)"; 

[Note: clause (v) added to paragraph (6)(A) of section 1923(f) 
by section 1203(b) of HCERA] 

[Note: a clause (Hi) is added to paragraph (6)(B) of section 
1923(f) by section 10201(e)(1)(A)] 

(3) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8); and 

(4) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new 
paragraph: 

"(7) Medicaid dsh reductions. — [Replaced by section 
1203(2) of HCERA; previously revised by section 10201(e)(1)(B)] 
"(A) Reductions. — 

"(i) In general. — For each of fiscal years 2014 
through 2020 the Secretary shall effect the following 
reductions: 

"(I) Reduction in dsh allotments. — The 
Secretary shall reduce DSH allotments to States 
in the amount specified under the DSH health re- 
form methodology under subparagraph (B) for the 
State for the fiscal year. 

"(II) Reductions in payments. — The Sec- 
retary shall reduce payments to States under sec- 
tion 1903(a) for each calendar quarter in the fiscal 
year, in the manner specified in clause (iii), in an 
amount equal to of the DSH allotment reduc- 
tion under subclause (I) for the State for the fiscal 
year. 

"(ii) Aggregate reductions. — The aggregate re- 
ductions in DSH allotments for all States under clause 
(i)(I) shall be equal to — 

"(I) $500,000,000 for fiscal year 2014; 

"(II) $600,000,000 for fiscal year 2015; 

"(III) $600,000,000 for fiscal year 2016; 

"(IV) $1,800,000,000 for fiscal year 2017; 

"(V) $5,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2018; 

"(VI) $5,600,000,000 for fiscal year 2019; and 

"(VII) $4,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2020. 
The Secretary shall distribute such aggregate reduc- 
tions among States in accordance with subparagraph 
(B). 

"(iii) Manner of payment reduction. — The 
amount of the payment reduction under clause (i)(II) 
for a State for a quarter shall be deemed an overpay- 
ment to the State under this title to be disallowed 
against the State's regular quarterly draw for all 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2601 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



224 



spending under section 1903(d)(2). Such a disallow- 
ance is not subject to a reconsideration under sub- 
sections (d) and (e) of section 1116. 

"(iv) Definition. — In this paragraph, the term 
'State' means the 50 States and the District of Colum- 
bia. 

"(B) DSH health reform methodology. — The Sec- 
retary shall carry out subparagraph (A) through use of a 
DSH Health Reform methodology that meets the following 
requirements: 

"(i) The methodology imposes the largest percent- 
age reductions on the States that — 

"(I) have the lowest percentages of uninsured 
individuals (determined on the basis of data from 
the Bureau of the Census, audited hospital cost 
reports, and other information likely to yield accu- 
rate data) during the most recent year for which 
such data are available; or 

"(II) do not target their DSH payments on — 
"(aa) hospitals with high volumes of Med- 
icaid inpatients (as defined in subsection 
(b)(1)(A)); and 

"(bb) hospitals that have high levels of 
uncompensated care (excluding bad debt), 
"(ii) The methodology imposes a smaller percent- 
age reduction on low DSH States described in para- 
graph (5)(B). 

"(hi) The methodology takes into account the ex- 
tent to which the DSH allotment for a State was in- 
cluded in the budget neutrality calculation for a cov- 
erage expansion approved under section 1115 as of 
July 31, 2009.". 
[Subsection (b) stricken by section 10201(f)~\ 

Subtitle H — Improved Coordination for 
Dual Eligible Beneficiaries 

SEC. 2601. 5-YEAR PERIOD FOR DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS. 

(a) In General. — Section 1915(h) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396n(h)) is amended— 

(1) by inserting "(1)" after "(h)"; 

(2) by inserting ", or a waiver described in paragraph (2)" 
after "(e)"; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 
"(2)(A) Notwithstanding subsections (c)(3) and (d) (3), any 

waiver under subsection (b), (c), or (d), or a waiver under section 
1115, that provides medical assistance for dual eligible individuals 
(including any such waivers under which non dual eligible individ- 
uals may be enrolled in addition to dual eligible individuals) may 
be conducted for a period of 5 years and, upon the request of the 
State, may be extended for additional 5-year periods unless the 
Secretary determines that for the previous waiver period the condi- 
tions for the waiver have not been met or it would no longer be 

June 9, 2010 



225 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2602 



cost-effective and efficient, or consistent with the purposes of this 
title, to extend the waiver. 

"(B) In this paragraph, the term 'dual eligible individual' 
means an individual who is entitled to, or enrolled for, benefits 
under part A of title XVIII, or enrolled for benefits under part B 
of title XVIII, and is eligible for medical assistance under the State 
plan under this title or under a waiver of such plan.". 

(b) Conforming Amendments. — 

(1) Section 1915 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n) is amend- 
ed— 

(A) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new sentence: "Subsection (h)(2) shall apply to a 
waiver under this subsection."; 

(B) in subsection (c)(3), in the second sentence, by in- 
serting "(other than a waiver described in subsection 
(h)(2))" after "A waiver under this subsection"; 

(C) in subsection (d)(3), in the second sentence, by in- 
serting "(other than a waiver described in subsection 
(h)(2))" after "A waiver under this subsection". 

(2) Section 1115 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1315) is amended— 

(A) in subsection (e)(2), by inserting "(5 years, in the 
case of a waiver described in section 1915(h)(2))" after "3 
years"; and 

(B) in subsection (f)(6), by inserting "(5 years, in the 
case of a waiver described in section 1915(h)(2))" after "3 
years". 

SEC. 2602 [42 U.S.C. 1315b]. PROVIDING FEDERAL COVERAGE AND PAY- 
MENT COORDINATION FOR DUAL ELIGIBLE BENE- 
FICIARIES. 

(a) Establishment of Federal Coordinated Health Care 
Office. — 

(1) In general.— Not later than March 1, 2010, the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred 
to as the "Secretary") shall establish a Federal Coordinated 
Health Care Office. 

(2) Establishment and reporting to cms adminis- 
trator. — The Federal Coordinated Health Care Office — 

(A) shall be established within the Centers for Medi- 
care &amp; Medicaid Services; and 

(B) have as the Office a Director who shall be ap- 
pointed by, and be in direct line of authority to, the Ad- 
ministrator of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Serv- 
ices. 

(b) Purpose. — The purpose of the Federal Coordinated Health 
Care Office is to bring together officers and employees of the Medi- 
care and Medicaid programs at the Centers for Medicare &amp; Med- 
icaid Services in order to — 

(1) more effectively integrate benefits under the Medicare 
program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act and the 
Medicaid program under title XIX of such Act; and 

(2) improve the coordination between the Federal Govern- 
ment and States for individuals eligible for benefits under both 
such programs in order to ensure that such individuals get full 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2602 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



226 



access to the items and services to which they are entitled 
under titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act. 

(c) Goals. — The goals of the Federal Coordinated Health Care 
Office are as follows: 

(1) Providing dual eligible individuals full access to the 
benefits to which such individuals are entitled under the Medi- 
care and Medicaid programs. 

(2) Simplifying the processes for dual eligible individuals 
to access the items and services they are entitled to under the 
Medicare and Medicaid programs. 

(3) Improving the quality of health care and long-term 
services for dual eligible individuals. 

(4) Increasing dual eligible individuals' understanding of 
and satisfaction with coverage under the Medicare and Med- 
icaid programs. 

(5) Eliminating regulatory conflicts between rules under 
the Medicare and Medicaid programs. 

(6) Improving care continuity and ensuring safe and effec- 
tive care transitions for dual eligible individuals. 

(7) Eliminating cost-shifting between the Medicare and 
Medicaid program and among related health care providers. 

(8) Improving the quality of performance of providers of 
services and suppliers under the Medicare and Medicaid pro- 
grams. 

(d) Specific Responsibilities. — The specific responsibilities of 
the Federal Coordinated Health Care Office are as follows: 

(1) Providing States, specialized MA plans for special 
needs individuals (as denned in section 1859(b)(6) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-28(b)(6))), physicians and other 
relevant entities or individuals with the education and tools 
necessary for developing programs that align benefits under 
the Medicare and Medicaid programs for dual eligible individ- 
uals. 

(2) Supporting State efforts to coordinate and align acute 
care and long-term care services for dual eligible individuals 
with other items and services furnished under the Medicare 
program. 

(3) Providing support for coordination of contracting and 
oversight by States and the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid 
Services with respect to the integration of the Medicare and 
Medicaid programs in a manner that is supportive of the goals 
described in paragraph (3). 

(4) To consult and coordinate with the Medicare Payment 
Advisory Commission established under section 1805 of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395b-6) and the Medicaid and 
CHIP Payment and Access Commission established under sec- 
tion 1900 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396) with respect to policies 
relating to the enrollment in, and provision of, benefits to dual 
eligible individuals under the Medicare program under title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act and the Medicaid program 
under title XIX of such Act. 

(5) To study the provision of drug coverage for new full- 
benefit dual eligible individuals (as defined in section 
1935(c)(6) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-5(c)(6)), 

June 9, 2010 



227 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2701M139B SSA 



as well as to monitor and report annual total expenditures, 
health outcomes, and access to benefits for all dual eligible in- 
dividuals. 

(e) Report. — The Secretary shall, as part of the budget trans- 
mitted under section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, sub- 
mit to Congress an annual report containing recommendations for 
legislation that would improve care coordination and benefits for 
dual eligible individuals. 

(f) Dual Eligible Defined. — In this section, the term "dual el- 
igible individual" means an individual who is entitled to, or en- 
rolled for, benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security 
Act, or enrolled for benefits under part B of title XVIII of such Act, 
and is eligible for medical assistance under a State plan under title 
XIX of such Act or under a waiver of such plan. 

Subtitle I — Improving the Quality of 
Medicaid for Patients and Providers 

SEC. 2701. ADULT HEALTH QUALITY MEASURES. 

Title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301 et seq.), as 
amended by section 401 of the Children's Health Insurance Pro- 
gram Reauthorization Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-3), is amended 
by inserting after section 1139A the following new section: 

"SEC. 1139B [42 U.S.C. 1320b-9b]. ADULT HEALTH QUALITY MEASURES. 

"(a) Development of Core Set of Health Care Quality 
Measures for Adults Eligible for Benefits Under Med- 
icaid. — The Secretary shall identify and publish a recommended 
core set of adult health quality measures for Medicaid eligible 
adults in the same manner as the Secretary identifies and pub- 
lishes a core set of child health quality measures under section 
1139 A, including with respect to identifying and publishing exist- 
ing adult health quality measures that are in use under public and 
privately sponsored health care coverage arrangements, or that are 
part of reporting systems that measure both the presence and du- 
ration of health insurance coverage over time, that may be applica- 
ble to Medicaid eligible adults. 
"(b) Deadlines. — 

"(1) Recommended measures. — Not later than January 1, 
2011, the Secretary shall identify and publish for comment a 
recommended core set of adult health quality measures for 
Medicaid eligible adults. 

"(2) Dissemination. — Not later than January 1, 2012, the 
Secretary shall publish an initial core set of adult health qual- 
ity measures that are applicable to Medicaid eligible adults. 

"(3) Standardized reporting. — Not later than January 1, 
2013, the Secretary, in consultation with States, shall develop 
a standardized format for reporting information based on the 
initial core set of adult health quality measures and create pro- 
cedures to encourage States to use such measures to volun- 
tarily report information regarding the quality of health care 
for Medicaid eligible adults. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2701M139B SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



228 



"(4) Reports to congress. — Not later than January 1, 
2014, and every 3 years thereafter, the Secretary shall include 
in the report to Congress required under section 1139A(a)(6) 
information similar to the information required under that sec- 
tion with respect to the measures established under this sec- 
tion. 

"(5) Establishment of medicaid quality measurement 
program. — 

"(A) In general. — Not later than 12 months after the 
release of the recommended core set of adult health quality 
measures under paragraph (1)), the Secretary shall estab- 
lish a Medicaid Quality Measurement Program in the 
same manner as the Secretary establishes the pediatric 
quality measures program under section 1139A(b). The ag- 
gregate amount awarded by the Secretary for grants and 
contracts for the development, testing, and validation of 
emerging and innovative evidence-based measures under 
such program shall equal the aggregate amount awarded 
by the Secretary for grants under section 1139A(b)(4)(A) 

"(B) Revising, strengthening, and improving ini- 
tial core measures. — Beginning not later than 24 
months after the establishment of the Medicaid Quality 
Measurement Program, and annually thereafter, the Sec- 
retary shall publish recommended changes to the initial 
core set of adult health quality measures that shall reflect 
the results of the testing, validation, and consensus proc- 
ess for the development of adult health quality measures. 
"(c) Construction. — Nothing in this section shall be construed 
as supporting the restriction of coverage, under title XIX or XXI or 
otherwise, to only those services that are evidence-based, or in any- 
way limiting available services. 

"(d) Annual State Reports Regarding State-Specific Qual- 
ity of Care Measures Applied Under Medicaid. — 

"(1) Annual state reports. — Each State with a State 
plan or waiver approved under title XIX shall annually report 
(separately or as part of the annual report required under sec- 
tion 1139A(c)), to the Secretary on the — 

"(A) State-specific adult health quality measures ap- 
plied by the State under the such plan, including measures 
described in subsection (a)(5); and 

"(B) State-specific information on the quality of health 
care furnished to Medicaid eligible adults under such plan, 
including information collected through external quality 
reviews of managed care organizations under section 1932 
and benchmark plans under section 1937. 
"(2) Publication. — Not later than September 30, 2014, 
and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall collect, analyze, 
and make publicly available the information reported by States 
under paragraph (1). 

"(e) Appropriation. — Out of any funds in the Treasury not 
otherwise appropriated, there is appropriated for each of fiscal 
years 2010 through 2014, $60,000,000 for the purpose of carrying 
out this section. Funds appropriated under this subsection shall re- 
main available until expended.". 

June 9, 2010 



229 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2703M945 SSA 



SEC. 2702 [42 U.S.C. 1396b-l]. PAYMENT ADJUSTMENT FOR HEALTH 
CARE-ACQUIRED CONDITIONS. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices (in this subsection referred to as the "Secretary") shall identify 
current State practices that prohibit payment for health care-ac- 
quired conditions and shall incorporate the practices identified, or 
elements of such practices, which the Secretary determines appro- 
priate for application to the Medicaid program in regulations. Such 
regulations shall be effective as of July 1, 2011, and shall prohibit 
payments to States under section 1903 of the Social Security Act 
for any amounts expended for providing medical assistance for 
health care-acquired conditions specified in the regulations. The 
regulations shall ensure that the prohibition on payment for health 
care-acquired conditions shall not result in a loss of access to care 
or services for Medicaid beneficiaries. 

(b) Health Care-Acquired Condition. — In this section, the 
term "health care-acquired condition" means a medical condition 
for which an individual was diagnosed that could be identified by 
a secondary diagnostic code described in section 1886(d)(4)(D)(iv) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(4)(D)(iv)). 

(c) Medicare Provisions. — In carrying out this section, the 
Secretary shall apply to State plans (or waivers) under title XIX of 
the Social Security Act the regulations promulgated pursuant to 
section 1886(d)(4)(D) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(4)(D)) relat- 
ing to the prohibition of payments based on the presence of a sec- 
ondary diagnosis code specified by the Secretary in such regula- 
tions, as appropriate for the Medicaid program. The Secretary may 
exclude certain conditions identified under title XVIII of the Social 
Security Act for non-payment under title XIX of such Act when the 
Secretary finds the inclusion of such conditions to be inapplicable 
to beneficiaries under title XIX. 

SEC. 2703. STATE OPTION TO PROVIDE HEALTH HOMES FOR ENROLL- 
EES WITH CHRONIC CONDITIONS. 

(a) State Plan Amendment. — Title XIX of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a et seq.), as amended by sections 2201 and 
2305, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: 

"Sec. 1945 [42 U.S.C. 1396w-4]. State Option To Provide Co- 
ordinated Care Through a Health Home for Individuals With 
Chronic Conditions. — 

"(a) In General. — Notwithstanding section 1902(a)(1) (relating 
to statewideness), section 1902(a)(10)(B) (relating to comparability), 
and any other provision of this title for which the Secretary deter- 
mines it is necessary to waive in order to implement this section, 
beginning January 1, 2011, a State, at its option as a State plan 
amendment, may provide for medical assistance under this title to 
eligible individuals with chronic conditions who select a designated 
provider (as described under subsection (h)(5)), a team of health 
care professionals (as described under subsection (h)(6)) operating 
with such a provider, or a health team (as described under sub- 
section (h)(7)) as the individual's health home for purposes of pro- 
viding the individual with health home services. 

"(b) Health Home Qualification Standards. — The Secretary 
shall establish standards for qualification as a designated provider 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2703U945 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



230 



for the purpose of being eligible to be a health home for purposes 
of this section. 

"(c) Payments. — 

"(1) In general. — A State shall provide a designated pro- 
vider, a team of health care professionals operating with such 
a provider, or a health team with payments for the provision 
of health home services to each eligible individual with chronic 
conditions that selects such provider, team of health care pro- 
fessionals, or health team as the individual's health home. Pay- 
ments made to a designated provider, a team of health care 
professionals operating with such a provider, or a health team 
for such services shall be treated as medical assistance for pur- 
poses of section 1903(a), except that, during the first 8 fiscal 
year quarters that the State plan amendment is in effect, the 
Federal medical assistance percentage applicable to such pay- 
ments shall be equal to 90 percent. 
"(2) Methodology. — 

"(A) In general. — The State shall specify in the State 
plan amendment the methodology the State will use for 
determining payment for the provision of health home 
services. Such methodology for determining payment — 

"(i) may be tiered to reflect, with respect to each 
eligible individual with chronic conditions provided 
such services by a designated provider, a team of 
health care professionals operating with such a pro- 
vider, or a health team, as well as the severity or 
number of each such individual's chronic conditions or 
the specific capabilities of the provider, team of health 
care professionals, or health team; and 

"(ii) shall be established consistent with section 
1902(aX30XA). 

"(B) Alternate models of payment. — The method- 
ology for determining payment for provision of health 
home services under this section shall not be limited to a 
per-member per-month basis and may provide (as proposed 
by the State and subject to approval by the Secretary) for 
alternate models of payment. 
"(3) Planning grants. — 

"(A) In general. — Beginning January 1, 2011, the 
Secretary may award planning grants to States for pur- 
poses of developing a State plan amendment under this 
section. A planning grant awarded to a State under this 
paragraph shall remain available until expended. 

"(B) State contribution. — A State awarded a plan- 
ning grant shall contribute an amount equal to the State 
percentage determined under section 1905(b) (without re- 
gard to section 5001 of Public Law 111-5) for each fiscal 
year for which the grant is awarded. 

"(C) Limitation. — The total amount of payments made 
to States under this paragraph shall not exceed 
$25,000,000. 

"(d) Hospital Referrals. — A State shall include in the State 
plan amendment a requirement for hospitals that are participating 
providers under the State plan or a waiver of such plan to establish 

June 9, 2010 



231 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2703M945 SSA 



procedures for referring any eligible individuals with chronic condi- 
tions who seek or need treatment in a hospital emergency depart- 
ment to designated providers. 

"(e) Coordination. — A State shall consult and coordinate, as 
appropriate, with the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration in addressing issues regarding the prevention and 
treatment of mental illness and substance abuse among eligible in- 
dividuals with chronic conditions. 

"(f) Monitoring. — A State shall include in the State plan 
amendment — 

"(1) a methodology for tracking avoidable hospital readmis- 
sions and calculating savings that result from improved chron- 
ic care coordination and management under this section; and 
"(2) a proposal for use of health information technology in 
providing health home services under this section and improv- 
ing service delivery and coordination across the care con- 
tinuum (including the use of wireless patient technology to im- 
prove coordination and management of care and patient adher- 
ence to recommendations made by their provider). 
"(g) Report on Quality Measures. — As a condition for receiv- 
ing payment for health home services provided to an eligible indi- 
vidual with chronic conditions, a designated provider shall report 
to the State, in accordance with such requirements as the Sec- 
retary shall specify, on all applicable measures for determining the 
quality of such services. When appropriate and feasible, a des- 
ignated provider shall use health information technology in pro- 
viding the State with such information. 
"(h) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(1) Eligible individual with chronic conditions. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
term 'eligible individual with chronic conditions' means an 
individual who — 

"(i) is eligible for medical assistance under the 
State plan or under a waiver of such plan; and 
"(ii) has at least — 

"(I) 2 chronic conditions; 

"(II) 1 chronic condition and is at risk of hav- 
ing a second chronic condition; or 

"(III) 1 serious and persistent mental health 
condition. 

"(B) Rule of construction. — Nothing in this para- 
graph shall prevent the Secretary from establishing higher 
levels as to the number or severity of chronic or mental 
health conditions for purposes of determining eligibility for 
receipt of health home services under this section. 
"(2) Chronic condition. — The term 'chronic condition' has 
the meaning given that term by the Secretary and shall in- 
clude, but is not limited to, the following: 

"(A) A mental health condition. 

"(B) Substance use disorder. 

"(C) Asthma. 

"(D) Diabetes. 

"(E) Heart disease. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2703U945 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



232 



"(F) Being overweight, as evidenced by having a Body 
Mass Index (BMI) over 25. 

"(3) Health home. — The term 'health home' means a des- 
ignated provider (including a provider that operates in coordi- 
nation with a team of health care professionals) or a health 
team selected by an eligible individual with chronic conditions 
to provide health home services. 
"(4) Health home services. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'health home services' 
means comprehensive and timely high-quality services de- 
scribed in subparagraph (B) that are provided by a des- 
ignated provider, a team of health care professionals oper- 
ating with such a provider, or a health team. 

"(B) Services described. — The services described in 
this subparagraph are — 

"(i) comprehensive care management; 
"(ii) care coordination and health promotion; 
"(hi) comprehensive transitional care, including 
appropriate follow-up, from inpatient to other settings; 

"(iv) patient and family support (including author- 
ized representatives); 

"(v) referral to community and social support serv- 
ices, if relevant; and 

"(vi) use of health information technology to link 
services, as feasible and appropriate. 
"(5) Designated provider. — The term 'designated pro- 
vider' means a physician, clinical practice or clinical group 
practice, rural clinic, community health center, community 
mental health center, home health agency, or any other entity 
or provider (including pediatricians, gynecologists, and obste- 
tricians) that is determined by the State and approved by the 
Secretary to be qualified to be a health home for eligible indi- 
viduals with chronic conditions on the basis of documentation 
evidencing that the physician, practice, or clinic — 

"(A) has the systems and infrastructure in place to 
provide health home services; and 

"(B) satisfies the qualification standards established 
by the Secretary under subsection (b). 
"(6) Team of health care professionals. — The term 
'team of health care professionals' means a team of health pro- 
fessionals (as described in the State plan amendment) that 
may— 

"(A) include physicians and other professionals, such 
as a nurse care coordinator, nutritionist, social worker, be- 
havioral health professional, or any professionals deemed 
appropriate by the State; and 

"(B) be free standing, virtual, or based at a hospital, 
community health center, community mental health cen- 
ter, rural clinic, clinical practice or clinical group practice, 
academic health center, or any entity deemed appropriate 
by the State and approved by the Secretary. 
"(7) Health team. — The term 'health team' has the mean- 
ing given such term for purposes of section 3502 of the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act.". 

June 9, 2010 



233 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2704 



(b) Evaluation. — 

(1) Independent evaluation. — 

(A) In general. — The Secretary shall enter into a con- 
tract with an independent entity or organization to con- 
duct an evaluation and assessment of the States that have 
elected the option to provide coordinated care through a 
health home for Medicaid beneficiaries with chronic condi- 
tions under section 1945 of the Social Security Act (as 
added by subsection (a)) for the purpose of determining the 
effect of such option on reducing hospital admissions, 
emergency room visits, and admissions to skilled nursing 
facilities. 

(B) Evaluation report. — Not later than January 1, 
2017, the Secretary shall report to Congress on the evalua- 
tion and assessment conducted under subparagraph (A). 

(2) Survey and interim report. — 

(A) In general. — Not later than January 1, 2014, the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services shall survey 
States that have elected the option under section 1945 of 
the Social Security Act (as added by subsection (a)) and re- 
port to Congress on the nature, extent, and use of such op- 
tion, particularly as it pertains to — 

(i) hospital admission rates; 

(ii) chronic disease management; 

(iii) coordination of care for individuals with 
chronic conditions; 

(iv) assessment of program implementation; 

(v) processes and lessons learned (as described in 
subparagraph (B)); 

(vi) assessment of quality improvements and clin- 
ical outcomes under such option; and 

(vii) estimates of cost savings. 

(B) Implementation reporting. — A State that has 
elected the option under section 1945 of the Social Security 
Act (as added by subsection (a)) shall report to the Sec- 
retary, as necessary, on processes that have been devel- 
oped and lessons learned regarding provision of coordi- 
nated care through a health home for Medicaid bene- 
ficiaries with chronic conditions under such option. 

SEC. 2704 [42 U.S.C. 1396a note]. DEMONSTRATION PROJECT TO EVALU- 
ATE INTEGRATED CARE around a hospitalization. 

(a) Authority To Conduct Project. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services (in this section referred to as the "Secretary") shall es- 
tablish a demonstration project under title XIX of the Social 
Security Act to evaluate the use of bundled payments for the 
provision of integrated care for a Medicaid beneficiary — 

(A) with respect to an episode of care that includes a 
hospitalization; and 

(B) for concurrent physicians services provided during 
a hospitalization. 

(2) Duration. — The demonstration project shall begin on 
January 1, 2012, and shall end on December 31, 2016. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2704 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



234 



(b) Requirements. — The demonstration project shall be con- 
ducted in accordance with the following: 

(1) The demonstration project shall be conducted in up to 
8 States, determined by the Secretary based on consideration 
of the potential to lower costs under the Medicaid program 
while improving care for Medicaid beneficiaries. A State se- 
lected to participate in the demonstration project may target 
the demonstration project to particular categories of bene- 
ficiaries, beneficiaries with particular diagnoses, or particular 
geographic regions of the State, but the Secretary shall insure 
that, as a whole, the demonstration project is, to the greatest 
extent possible, representative of the demographic and geo- 
graphic composition of Medicaid beneficiaries nationally. 

(2) The demonstration project shall focus on conditions 
where there is evidence of an opportunity for providers of serv- 
ices and suppliers to improve the quality of care furnished to 
Medicaid beneficiaries while reducing total expenditures under 
the State Medicaid programs selected to participate, as deter- 
mined by the Secretary. 

(3) A State selected to participate in the demonstration 
project shall specify the 1 or more episodes of care the State 
proposes to address in the project, the services to be included 
in the bundled payments, and the rationale for the selection of 
such episodes of care and services. The Secretary may modify 
the episodes of care as well as the services to be included in 
the bundled payments prior to or after approving the project. 
The Secretary may also vary such factors among the different 
States participating in the demonstration project. 

(4) The Secretary shall ensure that payments made under 
the demonstration project are adjusted for severity of illness 
and other characteristics of Medicaid beneficiaries within a cat- 
egory or having a diagnosis targeted as part of the demonstra- 
tion project. States shall ensure that Medicaid beneficiaries are 
not liable for any additional cost sharing than if their care had 
not been subject to payment under the demonstration project. 

(5) Hospitals participating in the demonstration project 
shall have or establish robust discharge planning programs to 
ensure that Medicaid beneficiaries requiring post-acute care 
are appropriately placed in, or have ready access to, post-acute 
care settings. 

(6) The Secretary and each State selected to participate in 
the demonstration project shall ensure that the demonstration 
project does not result in the Medicaid beneficiaries whose care 
is subject to payment under the demonstration project being 
provided with less items and services for which medical assist- 
ance is provided under the State Medicaid program than the 
items and services for which medical assistance would have 
been provided to such beneficiaries under the State Medicaid 
program in the absence of the demonstration project. 

(c) Waiver of Provisions. — Notwithstanding section 1115(a) 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1315(a)), the Secretary may 
waive such provisions of titles XIX, XVIII, and XI of that Act as 
may be necessary to accomplish the goals of the demonstration, en- 
June 9, 2010 



235 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2705 



sure beneficiary access to acute and post-acute care, and maintain 
quality of care. 

(d) Evaluation and Report. — 

(1) Data. — Each State selected to participate in the dem- 
onstration project under this section shall provide to the Sec- 
retary, in such form and manner as the Secretary shall specify, 
relevant data necessary to monitor outcomes, costs, and qual- 
ity, and evaluate the rationales for selection of the episodes of 
care and services specified by States under subsection (b)(3). 

(2) Report. — Not later than 1 year after the conclusion of 
the demonstration project, the Secretary shall submit a report 
to Congress on the results of the demonstration project. 

SEC. 2705 [42 U.S.C. 1315a note]. MEDICAID GLOBAL PAYMENT SYSTEM 
DEMONSTRATION PROJECT. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices (referred to in this section as the "Secretary") shall, in coordi- 
nation with the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (as 
established under section 1115A of the Social Security Act, as 
added by section 3021 of this Act), establish the Medicaid Global 
Payment System Demonstration Project under which a partici- 
pating State shall adjust the payments made to an eligible safety 
net hospital system or network from a fee-for-service payment 
structure to a global capitated payment model. 

(b) Duration and Scope. — The demonstration project con- 
ducted under this section shall operate during a period of fiscal 
years 2010 through 2012. The Secretary shall select not more than 
5 States to participate in the demonstration project. 

(c) Eligible Safety Net Hospital System or Network. — For 
purposes of this section, the term "eligible safety net hospital sys- 
tem or network" means a large, safety net hospital system or net- 
work (as defined by the Secretary) that operates within a State se- 
lected by the Secretary under subsection (b). 

(d) Evaluation. — 

(1) Testing. — The Innovation Center shall test and evalu- 
ate the demonstration project conducted under this section to 
examine any changes in health care quality outcomes and 
spending by the eligible safety net hospital systems or net- 
works. 

(2) Budget neutrality. — During the testing period under 
paragraph (1), any budget neutrality requirements under sec- 
tion 1115A(b)(3) of the Social Security Act (as so added) shall 
not be applicable. 

(3) Modification. — During the testing period under para- 
graph (1), the Secretary may, in the Secretary's discretion, 
modify or terminate the demonstration project conducted under 
this section. 

(e) Report. — Not later than 12 months after the date of com- 
pletion of the demonstration project under this section, the Sec- 
retary shall submit to Congress a report containing the results of 
the evaluation and testing conducted under subsection (d), together 
with recommendations for such legislation and administrative ac- 
tion as the Secretary determines appropriate. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2706 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



236 



(f) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are authorized 
to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this 
section. 

SEC. 2706 [42 U.S.C. 1396a note]. PEDIATRIC ACCOUNTABLE CARE OR- 
GANIZATION DEMONSTRATION PROJECT. 

(a) Authority To Conduct Demonstration. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services (referred to in this section as the "Secretary") shall es- 
tablish the Pediatric Accountable Care Organization Dem- 
onstration Project to authorize a participating State to allow 
pediatric medical providers that meet specified requirements to 
be recognized as an accountable care organization for purposes 
of receiving incentive payments (as described under subsection 
(d)), in the same manner as an accountable care organization 
is recognized and provided with incentive payments under sec- 
tion 1899 of the Social Security Act (as added by section 3022). 

(2) Duration. — The demonstration project shall begin on 
January 1, 2012, and shall end on December 31, 2016. 

(b) Application. — A State that desires to participate in the 
demonstration project under this section shall submit to the Sec- 
retary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such information as the Secretary may require. 

(c) Requirements. — 

(1) Performance guidelines. — The Secretary, in con- 
sultation with the States and pediatric providers, shall estab- 
lish guidelines to ensure that the quality of care delivered to 
individuals by a provider recognized as an accountable care or- 
ganization under this section is not less than the quality of 
care that would have otherwise been provided to such individ- 
uals. 

(2) Savings requirement. — A participating State, in con- 
sultation with the Secretary, shall establish an annual mini- 
mal level of savings in expenditures for items and services cov- 
ered under the Medicaid program under title XIX of the Social 
Security Act and the CHIP program under title XXI of such 
Act that must be reached by an accountable care organization 
in order for such organization to receive an incentive payment 
under subsection (d). 

(3) Minimum participation period. — A provider desiring 
to be recognized as an accountable care organization under the 
demonstration project shall enter into an agreement with the 
State to participate in the project for not less than a 3-year pe- 
riod. 

(d) Incentive Payment. — An accountable care organization 
that meets the performance guidelines established by the Secretary 
under subsection (c)(1) and achieves savings greater than the an- 
nual minimal savings level established by the State under sub- 
section (c)(2) shall receive an incentive payment for such year equal 
to a portion (as determined appropriate by the Secretary) of the 
amount of such excess savings. The Secretary may establish an an- 
nual cap on incentive payments for an accountable care organiza- 
tion. 

June 9, 2010 



237 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2707 



(e) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are authorized 
to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this 
section. 

SEC. 2707 [42 U.S.C. 1396a note]. MEDICAID EMERGENCY PSYCHIATRIC 
DEMONSTRATION PROJECT. 

(a) Authority To Conduct Demonstration Project. — The 
Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred 
to as the "Secretary") shall establish a demonstration project under 
which an eligible State (as described in subsection (c)) shall provide 
payment under the State Medicaid plan under title XIX of the So- 
cial Security Act to an institution for mental diseases that is not 
publicly owned or operated and that is subject to the requirements 
of section 1867 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395dd) for the 
provision of medical assistance available under such plan to indi- 
viduals who — 

(1) have attained age 21, but have not attained age 65; 

(2) are eligible for medical assistance under such plan; and 

(3) require such medical assistance to stabilize an emer- 
gency medical condition. 

(b) Stabilization Review. — A State shall specify in its applica- 
tion described in subsection (c)(1) establish a mechanism for how 
it will ensure that institutions participating in the demonstration 
will determine whether or not such individuals have been sta- 
bilized (as defined in subsection (h)(5)). This mechanism shall com- 
mence before the third day of the inpatient stay. States partici- 
pating in the demonstration project may manage the provision of 
services for the stabilization of medical emergency conditions 
through utilization review, authorization, or management practices, 
or the application of medical necessity and appropriateness criteria 
applicable to behavioral health. 

(c) Eligible State Defined. — 

(1) In general.— An eligible State is a State that has 
made an application and has been selected pursuant to para- 
graphs (2) and (3). 

(2) Application. — A State seeking to participate in the 
demonstration project under this section shall submit to the 
Secretary, at such time and in such format as the Secretary re- 
quires, an application that includes such information, provi- 
sions, and assurances, as the Secretary may require. 

(3) Selection.— A State shall be determined eligible for 
the demonstration by the Secretary on a competitive basis 
among States with applications meeting the requirements of 
paragraph (1). In selecting State applications for the dem- 
onstration project, the Secretary shall seek to achieve an ap- 
propriate national balance in the geographic distribution of 
such projects. 

(d) Length of Demonstration Project. — The demonstration 
project established under this section shall be conducted for a pe- 
riod of 3 consecutive years. 

(e) Limitations on Federal Funding. — 

(1) Appropriation. — 

(A) In general. — Out of any funds in the Treasury 
not otherwise appropriated, there is appropriated to carry 
out this section, $75,000,000 for fiscal year 2011. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2707 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



238 



(B) Budget authority. — Subparagraph (A) con- 
stitutes budget authority in advance of appropriations Act 
and represents the obligation of the Federal Government 
to provide for the payment of the amounts appropriated 
under that subparagraph. 

(2) 5-year availability. — Funds appropriated under para- 
graph (1) shall remain available for obligation through Decem- 
ber 31, 2015. 

(3) Limitation on payments. — In no case may — 

(A) the aggregate amount of payments made by the 
Secretary to eligible States under this section exceed 
$75,000,000; or 

(B) payments be provided by the Secretary under this 
section after December 31, 2015. 

(4) Funds allocated to states. — Funds shall be allo- 
cated to eligible States on the basis of criteria, including a 
State's application and the availability of funds, as determined 
by the Secretary. 

(5) Payments to states. — The Secretary shall pay to each 
eligible State, from its allocation under paragraph (4), an 
amount each quarter equal to the Federal medical assistance 
percentage of expenditures in the quarter for medical assist- 
ance described in subsection (a). As a condition of receiving 
payment, a State shall collect and report information, as deter- 
mined necessary by the Secretary, for the purposes of pro- 
viding Federal oversight and conducting an evaluation under 
subsection (f)(1). 

(f) Evaluation and Report to Congress. — 

(1) Evaluation. — The Secretary shall conduct an evalua- 
tion of the demonstration project in order to determine the im- 
pact on the functioning of the health and mental health service 
system and on individuals enrolled in the Medicaid program 
and shall include the following: 

(A) An assessment of access to inpatient mental health 
services under the Medicaid program; average lengths of 
inpatient stays; and emergency room visits. 

(B) An assessment of discharge planning by partici- 
pating hospitals. 

(C) An assessment of the impact of the demonstration 
project on the costs of the full range of mental health serv- 
ices (including inpatient, emergency and ambulatory care). 

(D) An analysis of the percentage of consumers with 
Medicaid coverage who are admitted to inpatient facilities 
as a result of the demonstration project as compared to 
those admitted to these same facilities through other 
means. 

(E) A recommendation regarding whether the dem- 
onstration project should be continued after December 31, 
2013, and expanded on a national basis. 

(2) Report— Not later than December 31, 2013, the Sec- 
retary shall submit to Congress and make available to the pub- 
lic a report on the findings of the evaluation under paragraph 
(1). 

(g) Waiver Authority. — 

June 9, 2010 



239 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2801 



(1) In general. — The Secretary shall waive the limitation 
of subdivision (B) following paragraph (28) of section 1905(a) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)) (relating to limita- 
tions on payments for care or services for individuals under 65 
years of age who are patients in an institution for mental dis- 
eases) for purposes of carrying out the demonstration project 
under this section. 

(2) Limited other waiver authority. — The Secretary 
may waive other requirements of titles XI and XIX of the So- 
cial Security Act (including the requirements of sections 
1902(a)(1) (relating to statewideness) and 1902(1)(10)(B) (relat- 
ing to comparability)) only to extent necessary to carry out the 
demonstration project under this section. 

(h) Definitions. — In this section: 

(1) Emergency medical condition. — The term "emer- 
gency medical condition" means, with respect to an individual, 
an individual who expresses suicidal or homicidal thoughts or 
gestures, if determined dangerous to self or others. 

(2) Federal medical assistance percentage. — The term 
"Federal medical assistance percentage" has the meaning given 
that term with respect to a State under section 1905(b) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(b)). 

(3) Institution for mental diseases. — The term "institu- 
tion for mental diseases" has the meaning given to that term 
in section 1905(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396d(i)). 

(4) Medical assistance. — The term "medical assistance" 
has the meaning given that term in section 1905(a) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)). 

(5) Stabilized. — The term "stabilized" means, with respect 
to an individual, that the emergency medical condition no 
longer exists with respect to the individual and the individual 
is no longer dangerous to self or others. 

(6) State. — The term "State" has the meaning given that 
term for purposes of title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396 et seq.). 

Subtitle J — Improvements to the Medicaid 
and CHIP Payment and Access Commis- 
sion (MACPAC) 

SEC. 2801. MACPAC ASSESSMENT OF POLICIES AFFECTING ALL MED- 
ICAID BENEFICIARIES. 

(a) In General. — Section 1900 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396) is amended— 

(1) in subsection (b) — 

(A) in paragraph (1) — 

(i) in the paragraph heading, by inserting "for 
all states" before "and annual"; and 

(ii) in subparagraph (A), by striking "children's"; 

(iii) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ", the Sec- 
retary, and States" after "Congress"; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2801 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



240 



(iv) in subparagraph (C), by striking "March 1" 
and inserting "March 15"; and 

(v) in subparagraph (D), by striking "June 1" and 
inserting "June 15"; 

(B) in paragraph (2) — 

(i) in subparagraph (A) — 

(I) in clause (i) — 

(aa) by inserting "the efficient provision 
of after "expenditures for"; and 

(bb) by striking "hospital, skilled nursing 
facility, physician, Federally-qualified health 
center, rural health center, and other fees" 
and inserting "payments to medical, dental, 
and health professionals, hospitals, residen- 
tial and long-term care providers, providers of 
home and community based services, Feder- 
ally-qualified health centers and rural health 
clinics, managed care entities, and providers 
of other covered items and services"; and 

(II) in clause (iii), by inserting "(including how 
such factors and methodologies enable such bene- 
ficiaries to obtain the services for which they are 
eligible, affect provider supply, and affect pro- 
viders that serve a disproportionate share of low- 
income and other vulnerable populations)" after 
"beneficiaries"; 

(ii) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) and (C) as 
subparagraphs (F) and (H), respectively; 

(iii) by inserting after subparagraph (A), the fol- 
lowing: 

"(B) Eligibility policies. — Medicaid and CHIP eligi- 
bility policies, including a determination of the degree to 
which Federal and State policies provide health care cov- 
erage to needy populations. 

"(C) Enrollment and retention processes. — Med- 
icaid and CHIP enrollment and retention processes, includ- 
ing a determination of the degree to which Federal and 
State policies encourage the enrollment of individuals who 
are eligible for such programs and screen out individuals 
who are ineligible, while minimizing the share of program 
expenses devoted to such processes. 

"(D) Coverage policies— Medicaid and CHIP benefit 
and coverage policies, including a determination of the de- 
gree to which Federal and State policies provide access to 
the services enrollees require to improve and maintain 
their health and functional status. 

"(E) Quality of care. — Medicaid and CHIP policies 
as they relate to the quality of care provided under those 
programs, including a determination of the degree to 
which Federal and State policies achieve their stated goals 
and interact with similar goals established by other pur- 
chasers of health care services."; 

June 9, 2010 



241 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2801 



(iv) by inserting after subparagraph (F) (as redes- 
ignated by clause (ii) of this subparagraph), the fol- 
lowing: 

"(G) Interactions with medicare and medicaid. — 
Consistent with paragraph (11), the interaction of policies 
under Medicaid and the Medicare program under title 
XVIII, including with respect to how such interactions af- 
fect access to services, payments, and dual eligible individ- 
uals." and 

(v) in subparagraph (H) (as so redesignated), by 
inserting "and preventive, acute, and long-term serv- 
ices and supports" after "barriers"; 

(C) by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (9) as 
paragraphs (4) through (10), respectively; 

(D) by inserting after paragraph (2), the following new 
paragraph: 

"(3) Recommendations and reports of state-specific 
data.— MACPAC shall— 

"(A) review national and State-specific Medicaid and 
CHIP data; and 

"(B) submit reports and recommendations to Congress, 
the Secretary, and States based on such reviews."; 

(E) in paragraph (4), as redesignated by subparagraph 
(C), by striking "or any other problems" and all that fol- 
lows through the period and inserting ", as well as other 
factors that adversely affect, or have the potential to ad- 
versely affect, access to care by, or the health care status 
of, Medicaid and CHIP beneficiaries. MACPAC shall in- 
clude in the annual report required under paragraph 
(1)(D) a description of all such areas or problems identified 
with respect to the period addressed in the report."; 

(F) in paragraph (5), as so redesignated, — 

(i) in the paragraph heading, by inserting "AND 
regulations" after "reports"; and 

(ii) by striking "If and inserting the following: 
"(A) Certain secretarial reports. — If; and 

(iii) in the second sentence, by inserting "and the 
Secretary" after "appropriate committees of Congress"; 
and 

(iv) by adding at the end the following: 

"(B) Regulations.— MACPAC shall review Medicaid 
and CHIP regulations and may comment through submis- 
sion of a report to the appropriate committees of Congress 
and the Secretary, on any such regulations that affect ac- 
cess, quality, or efficiency of health care."; 

(G) in paragraph (10), as so redesignated, by inserting 
", and shall submit with any recommendations, a report on 
the Federal and State-specific budget consequences of the 
recommendations" before the period; and 

(H) by adding at the end the following: 

"(11) Consultation and coordination with medpac. — 

"(A) In general. — MACPAC shall consult with the 
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (in this para- 
graph referred to as 'MedPAC') established under section 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2801 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



242 



1805 in carrying out its duties under this section, as ap- 
propriate and particularly with respect to the issues speci- 
fied in paragraph (2) as they relate to those Medicaid 
beneficiaries who are dually eligible for Medicaid and the 
Medicare program under title XVIII, adult Medicaid bene- 
ficiaries (who are not dually eligible for Medicare), and 
beneficiaries under Medicare. Responsibility for analysis of 
and recommendations to change Medicare policy regarding 
Medicare beneficiaries, including Medicare beneficiaries 
who are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, shall 
rest with MedPAC. 

"(B) Information sharing— MACPAC and MedPAC 
shall have access to deliberations and records of the other 
such entity, respectively, upon the request of the other 
such entity. 

"(12) Consultation with states. — MACPAC shall regu- 
larly consult with States in carrying out its duties under this 
section, including with respect to developing processes for car- 
rying out such duties, and shall ensure that input from States 
is taken into account and represented in MACPAC's rec- 
ommendations and reports. 

"(13) Coordinate and consult with the federal co- 
ordinated health care office. — MACPAC shall coordinate 
and consult with the Federal Coordinated Health Care Office 
established under section 2081 of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act before making any recommendations re- 
garding dual eligible individuals. 

"(14) Programmatic oversight vested in the sec- 
retary. — MACPAC's authority to make recommendations in 
accordance with this section shall not affect, or be considered 
to duplicate, the Secretary's authority to carry out Federal re- 
sponsibilities with respect to Medicaid and CHIP."; 
(2) in subsection (c)(2) — 

(A) by striking subparagraphs (A) and (B) and insert- 
ing the following: 

"(A) In general. — The membership of MACPAC shall 
include individuals who have had direct experience as en- 
rollees or parents or caregivers of enrollees in Medicaid or 
CHIP and individuals with national recognition for their 
expertise in Federal safety net health programs, health fi- 
nance and economics, actuarial science, health plans and 
integrated delivery systems, reimbursement for health 
care, health information technology, and other providers of 
health services, public health, and other related fields, who 
provide a mix of different professions, broad geographic 
representation, and a balance between urban and rural 
representation. 

"(B) Inclusion. — The membership of MACPAC shall 
include (but not be limited to) physicians, dentists, and 
other health professionals, employers, third-party payers, 
and individuals with expertise in the delivery of health 
services. Such membership shall also include representa- 
tives of children, pregnant women, the elderly, individuals 
with disabilities, caregivers, and dual eligible individuals, 

June 9, 2010 



243 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2801 



current or former representatives of State agencies respon- 
sible for administering Medicaid, and current or former 
representatives of State agencies responsible for admin- 
istering CHIP.". 

(3) in subsection (d)(2), by inserting "and State" after "Fed- 
eral"; 

(4) in subsection (e)(1), in the first sentence, by inserting 
"and, as a condition for receiving payments under sections 
1903(a) and 2105(a), from any State agency responsible for ad- 
ministering Medicaid or CHIP," after "United States"; and 

(5) in subsection (f) — 

(A) in the subsection heading, by striking "Authoriza- 
tion of Appropriations" and inserting "Funding"; 

(B) in paragraph (1), by inserting "(other than for fis- 
cal year 2010)" before "in the same manner"; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following: 
"(3) Funding for fiscal year 2010. — 

"(A) In general. — Out of any funds in the Treasury 
not otherwise appropriated, there is appropriated to 
MACPAC to carry out the provisions of this section for fis- 
cal year 2010, $9,000,000. 

"(B) Transfer of funds. — Notwithstanding section 
2104(a)(13), from the amounts appropriated in such section 
for fiscal year 2010, $2,000,000 is hereby transferred and 
made available in such fiscal year to MACPAC to carry out 
the provisions of this section. 

"(4) Availability. — Amounts made available under para- 
graphs (2) and (3) to MACPAC to carry out the provisions of 
this section shall remain available until expended.", 
(b) Conforming MedPAC Amendments. — Section 1805(b) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395b-6(b)), is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (1)(C), by striking "March 1 of each year 
(beginning with 1998)" and inserting "March 15"; 

(2) in paragraph (1)(D), by inserting ", and (beginning with 
2012) containing an examination of the topics described in 
paragraph (9), to the extent feasible" before the period; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following: 

"(9) Review and annual report on medicaid and com- 
mercial TRENDS. — The Commission shall review and report on 
aggregate trends in spending, utilization, and financial per- 
formance under the Medicaid program under title XIX and the 
private market for health care services with respect to pro- 
viders for which, on an aggregate national basis, a significant 
portion of revenue or services is associated with the Medicaid 
program. Where appropriate, the Commission shall conduct 
such review in consultation with the Medicaid and CHIP Pay- 
ment and Access Commission established under section 1900 
(in this section referred to as 'MACPAC'). 

"(10) Coordinate and consult with the federal co- 
ordinated health care office. — The Commission shall co- 
ordinate and consult with the Federal Coordinated Health 
Care Office established under section 2081 of the Patient Pro- 
tection and Affordable Care Act before making any rec- 
ommendations regarding dual eligible individuals. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2901 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



244 



"(11) Interaction of medicaid and medicare. — The Com- 
mission shall consult with MACPAC in carrying out its duties 
under this section, as appropriate. Responsibility for analysis 
of and recommendations to change Medicare policy regarding 
Medicare beneficiaries, including Medicare beneficiaries who 
are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, shall rest with 
the Commission. Responsibility for analysis of and rec- 
ommendations to change Medicaid policy regarding Medicaid 
beneficiaries, including Medicaid beneficiaries who are dually 
eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, shall rest with MACPAC". 

Subtitle K — Protections for American 
Indians and Alaska Natives 

SEC. 2901 [25 U.S.C. 1623]. SPECIAL RULES RELATING TO INDIANS. 

(a) No Cost-sharing for Indians With Income at or Below 
300 Percent of Poverty Enrolled in Coverage Through a 
State Exchange. — For provisions prohibiting cost sharing for Indi- 
ans enrolled in any qualified health plan in the individual market 
through an Exchange, see section 1402(d) of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act. 

(b) Payer of Last Resort. — Health programs operated by the 
Indian Health Service, Indian tribes, tribal organizations, and 
Urban Indian organizations (as those terms are denned in section 
4 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603)) 
shall be the payer of last resort for services provided by such Serv- 
ice, tribes, or organizations to individuals eligible for services 
through such programs, notwithstanding any Federal, State, or 
local law to the contrary. 

(c) Facilitating Enrollment of Indians Under the Express 
Lane Option.— Section 1902(e)(13)(F)(ii) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396a(eX13XFXii)) is amended— 

(1) in the clause heading, by inserting "AND INDIAN TRIBES 
AND TRIBAL ORGANIZATIONS" after "AGENCIES"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following: 

"(IV) The Indian Health Service, an Indian 
Tribe, Tribal Organization, or Urban Indian Orga- 
nization (as defined in section 1139(c)).". 

(d) Technical Corrections.— Section 1139(c) of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 1320b-9(c)) is amended by striking "In this 
section" and inserting "For purposes of this section, title XIX, and 
title XXI". 

SEC. 2902. ELIMINATION OF SUNSET FOR REIMBURSEMENT FOR ALL 
MEDICARE PART B SERVICES FURNISHED BY CERTAIN IN- 
DIAN HOSPITALS AND CLINICS. 

(a) Reimbursement for All Medicare Part B Services Fur- 
nished by Certain Indian Hospitals and Clinics. — Section 
1880(e)(1)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395qq(e)(l)(A)) 
is amended by striking "during the 5-year period beginning on" and 
inserting "on or after". 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to items or services furnished on or after January 1, 
2010. 

June 9, 2010 



245 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2951X511 SSA 



Subtitle L— Maternal and Child Health 

Services 

SEC. 2951. MATERNAL, INFANT, AND EARLY CHILDHOOD HOME VIS- 
ITING PROGRAMS. 

Title V of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 701 et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section: 

"SEC. 511 [42 U.S.C. 711]. MATERNAL, INFANT, AND EARLY CHILDHOOD 
HOME VISITING PROGRAMS. 

"(a) Purposes. — The purposes of this section are — 

"(1) to strengthen and improve the programs and activities 
carried out under this title; 

"(2) to improve coordination of services for at risk commu- 
nities; and 

"(3) to identify and provide comprehensive services to im- 
prove outcomes for families who reside in at risk communities. 
"(b) Requirement for All States To Assess Statewide 
Needs and Identify at Risk Communities. — 

"(1) In general. — Not later than 6 months after the date 
of enactment of this section, each State shall, as a condition of 
receiving payments from an allotment for the State under sec- 
tion 502 for fiscal year 2011, conduct a statewide needs assess- 
ment (which shall be separate from the statewide needs assess- 
ment required under section 505(a)) that identifies — 
"(A) communities with concentrations of — 

"(i) premature birth, low-birth weight infants, and 
infant mortality, including infant death due to neglect, 
or other indicators of at-risk prenatal, maternal, new- 
born, or child health; 
"(ii) poverty; 
"(hi) crime; 

"(iv) domestic violence; 

"(v) high rates of high-school drop-outs; 

"(vi) substance abuse; 

"(vii) unemployment; or 

"(viii) child maltreatment; 
"(B) the quality and capacity of existing programs or 
initiatives for early childhood home visitation in the State 
including — 

"(i) the number and types of individuals and fami- 
lies who are receiving services under such programs or 
initiatives; 

"(ii) the gaps in early childhood home visitation in 
the State; and 

"(hi) the extent to which such programs or initia- 
tives are meeting the needs of eligible families de- 
scribed in subsection (k)(2); and 

"(C) the State's capacity for providing substance abuse 
treatment and counseling services to individuals and fami- 
lies in need of such treatment or services. 
"(2) Coordination with other assessments. — In con- 
ducting the statewide needs assessment required under para- 
graph (1), the State shall coordinate with, and take into ac- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2951X511 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



246 



count, other appropriate needs assessments conducted by the 
State, as determined by the Secretary, including the needs as- 
sessment required under section 505(a) (both the most recently 
completed assessment and any such assessment in progress), 
the community wide strategic planning and needs assessments 
conducted in accordance with section 640(g)(1)(C) of the Head 
Start Act, and the inventory of current unmet needs and cur- 
rent community-based and prevention-focused programs and 
activities to prevent child abuse and neglect, and other family 
resource services operating in the State required under section 
205(3) of the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act. 

"(3) Submission to the secretary. — Each State shall sub- 
mit to the Secretary, in such form and manner as the Sec- 
retary shall require — 

"(A) the results of the statewide needs assessment re- 
quired under paragraph (1); and 

"(B) a description of how the State intends to address 
needs identified by the assessment, particularly with re- 
spect to communities identified under paragraph (1)(A), 
which may include applying for a grant to conduct an early 
childhood home visitation program in accordance with the 
requirements of this section. 
"(c) Grants for Early Childhood Home Visitation Pro- 
grams— 

"(1) Authority to make grants. — In addition to any other 
payments made under this title to a State, the Secretary shall 
make grants to eligible entities to enable the entities to deliver 
services under early childhood home visitation programs that 
satisfy the requirements of subsection (d) to eligible families in 
order to promote improvements in maternal and prenatal 
health, infant health, child health and development, parenting 
related to child development outcomes, school readiness, and 
the socioeconomic status of such families, and reductions in 
child abuse, neglect, and injuries. 

"(2) Authority to use initial grant funds for plan- 
ning or implementation. — An eligible entity that receives a 
grant under paragraph (1) may use a portion of the funds 
made available to the entity during the first 6 months of the 
period for which the grant is made for planning or implementa- 
tion activities to assist with the establishment of early child- 
hood home visitation programs that satisfy the requirements of 
subsection (d). 

"(3) Grant duration. — The Secretary shall determine the 
period of years for which a grant is made to an eligible entity 
under paragraph (1). 

"(4) Technical assistance. — The Secretary shall provide 
an eligible entity that receives a grant under paragraph (1) 
with technical assistance in administering programs or activi- 
ties conducted in whole or in part with grant funds. 
"(d) Requirements. — The requirements of this subsection for 
an early childhood home visitation program conducted with a grant 
made under this section are as follows: 

"(1) Quantifiable, measurable improvement in bench- 
mark AREAS. — 

June 9, 2010 



247 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2951X511 SSA 



"(A) In general. — The eligible entity establishes, sub- 
ject to the approval of the Secretary, quantifiable, measur- 
able 3- and 5-year benchmarks for demonstrating that the 
program results in improvements for the eligible families 
participating in the program in each of the following areas: 
"(i) Improved maternal and newborn health, 
"(ii) Prevention of child injuries, child abuse, ne- 
glect, or maltreatment, and reduction of emergency de- 
partment visits. 

"(hi) Improvement in school readiness and 
achievement. 

"(iv) Reduction in crime or domestic violence, 
"(v) Improvements in family economic self-suffi- 
ciency. 

"(vi) Improvements in the coordination and refer- 
rals for other community resources and supports. 
"(B) Demonstration of improvements after 3 
years. — 

"(i) Report to the secretary. — Not later than 30 
days after the end of the 3rd year in which the eligible 
entity conducts the program, the entity submits to the 
Secretary a report demonstrating improvement in at 
least 4 of the areas specified in subparagraph (A). 

"(ii) Corrective action plan. — If the report sub- 
mitted by the eligible entity under clause (i) fails to 
demonstrate improvement in at least 4 of the areas 
specified in subparagraph (A), the entity shall develop 
and implement a plan to improve outcomes in each of 
the areas specified in subparagraph (A), subject to ap- 
proval by the Secretary. The plan shall include provi- 
sions for the Secretary to monitor implementation of 
the plan and conduct continued oversight of the pro- 
gram, including through submission by the entity of 
regular reports to the Secretary, 
"(iii) Technical assistance. — 

"(I) In general. — The Secretary shall provide 
an eligible entity required to develop and imple- 
ment an improvement plan under clause (ii) with 
technical assistance to develop and implement the 
plan. The Secretary may provide the technical as- 
sistance directly or through grants, contracts, or 
cooperative agreements. 

"(II) Advisory panel. — The Secretary shall 
establish an advisory panel for purposes of obtain- 
ing recommendations regarding the technical as- 
sistance provided to entities in accordance with 
subclause (I). 

"(iv) No improvement or failure to submit re- 
port. — If the Secretary determines after a period of 
time specified by the Secretary that an eligible entity 
implementing an improvement plan under clause (ii) 
has failed to demonstrate any improvement in the 
areas specified in subparagraph (A), or if the Secretary 
determines that an eligible entity has failed to submit 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2951X511 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



248 



the report required under clause (i), the Secretary 
shall terminate the entity's grant and may include any 
unexpended grant funds in grants made to nonprofit 
organizations under subsection (h)(2)(B). 
"(C) Final report. — Not later than December 31, 
2015, the eligible entity shall submit a report to the Sec- 
retary demonstrating improvements (if any) in each of the 
areas specified in subparagraph (A). 
"(2) Improvements in outcomes for individual fami- 
lies. — 

"(A) In general. — The program is designed, with re- 
spect to an eligible family participating in the program, to 
result in the participant outcomes described in subpara- 
graph (B) that the eligible entity identifies on the basis of 
an individualized assessment of the family, are relevant 
for that family. 

"(B) Participant outcomes. — The participant out- 
comes described in this subparagraph are the following: 

"(i) Improvements in prenatal, maternal, and new- 
born health, including improved pregnancy outcomes 

"(ii) Improvements in child health and develop- 
ment, including the prevention of child injuries and 
maltreatment and improvements in cognitive, lan- 
guage, social-emotional, and physical developmental 
indicators. 

"(hi) Improvements in parenting skills, 
"(iv) Improvements in school readiness and child 
academic achievement. 

"(v) Reductions in crime or domestic violence, 
"(vi) Improvements in family economic self-suffi- 
ciency. 

"(vii) Improvements in the coordination of refer- 
rals for, and the provision of, other community re- 
sources and supports for eligible families, consistent 
with State child welfare agency training. 
"(3) Core components. — The program includes the fol- 
lowing core components: 

"(A) Service delivery model or models. — 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), the pro- 
gram is conducted using 1 or more of the service deliv- 
ery models described in item (aa) or (bb) of subclause 
(I) or in subclause (II) selected by the eligible entity: 
"(I) The model conforms to a clear consistent 
home visitation model that has been in existence 
for at least 3 years and is research-based, ground- 
ed in relevant empirically-based knowledge, linked 
to program determined outcomes, associated with 
a national organization or institution of higher 
education that has comprehensive home visitation 
program standards that ensure high quality serv- 
ice delivery and continuous program quality im- 
provement, and has demonstrated significant, 
(and in the case of the service delivery model de- 
scribed in item (aa), sustained) positive outcomes, 

June 9, 2010 



249 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2951X511 SSA 



as described in the benchmark areas specified in 
paragraph (1)(A) and the participant outcomes de- 
scribed in paragraph (2)(B), when evaluated using 
well-designed and rigorous — 

"(aa) randomized controlled research de- 
signs, and the evaluation results have been 
published in a peer-reviewed journal; or 

"(bb) quasi-experimental research de- 
signs. 

"(II) The model conforms to a promising and 
new approach to achieving the benchmark areas 
specified in paragraph (1)(A) and the participant 
outcomes described in paragraph (2)(B), has been 
developed or identified by a national organization 
or institution of higher education, and will be 
evaluated through well-designed and rigorous 
process. 

"(ii) Majority of grant funds used for evi- 
dence-based models. — An eligible entity shall use 
not more than 25 percent of the amount of the grant 
paid to the entity for a fiscal year for purposes of con- 
ducting a program using the service delivery model de- 
scribed in clause (i)(H)- 

"(hi) Criteria for evidence of effectiveness 
of models. — The Secretary shall establish criteria for 
evidence of effectiveness of the service delivery models 
and shall ensure that the process for establishing the 
criteria is transparent and provides the opportunity 
for public comment. 
"(B) Additional requirements. — 

"(i) The program adheres to a clear, consistent 
model that satisfies the requirements of being ground- 
ed in empirically-based knowledge related to home vis- 
iting and linked to the benchmark areas specified in 
paragraph (1)(A) and the participant outcomes de- 
scribed in paragraph (2)(B) related to the purposes of 
the program. 

"(ii) The program employs well-trained and com- 
petent staff, as demonstrated by education or training, 
such as nurses, social workers, educators, child devel- 
opment specialists, or other well-trained and com- 
petent staff, and provides ongoing and specific training 
on the model being delivered. 

"(hi) The program maintains high quality super- 
vision to establish home visitor competencies. 

"(iv) The program demonstrates strong organiza- 
tional capacity to implement the activities involved. 

"(v) The program establishes appropriate linkages 
and referral networks to other community resources 
and supports for eligible families. 

"(vi) The program monitors the fidelity of program 
implementation to ensure that services are delivered 
pursuant to the specified model. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2951X511 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



250 



"(4) Priority for serving high-risk populations. — The 
eligible entity gives priority to providing services under the 
program to the following: 

"(A) Eligible families who reside in communities in 
need of such services, as identified in the statewide needs 
assessment required under subsection (b)(1)(A). 
"(B) Low-income eligible families. 

"(C) Eligible families who are pregnant women who 
have not attained age 21. 

"(D) Eligible families that have a history of child 
abuse or neglect or have had interactions with child wel- 
fare services. 

"(E) Eligible families that have a history of substance 
abuse or need substance abuse treatment. 

"(F) Eligible families that have users of tobacco prod- 
ucts in the home. 

"(G) Eligible families that are or have children with 
low student achievement. 

"(H) Eligible families with children with develop- 
mental delays or disabilities. 

"(I) Eligible families who, or that include individuals 
who, are serving or formerly served in the Armed Forces, 
including such families that have members of the Armed 
Forces who have had multiple deployments outside of the 
United States. 

"(e) Application Requirements. — An eligible entity desiring a 
grant under this section shall submit an application to the Sec- 
retary for approval, in such manner as the Secretary may require, 
that includes the following: 

"(1) A description of the populations to be served by the 
entity, including specific information regarding how the entity 
will serve high risk populations described in subsection (d)(4). 

"(2) An assurance that the entity will give priority to serv- 
ing low-income eligible families and eligible families who reside 
in at risk communities identified in the statewide needs assess- 
ment required under subsection (b)(1)(A). 

"(3) The service delivery model or models described in sub- 
section (d)(3)(A) that the entity will use under the program and 
the basis for the selection of the model or models. 

"(4) A statement identifying how the selection of the popu- 
lations to be served and the service delivery model or models 
that the entity will use under the program for such populations 
is consistent with the results of the statewide needs assess- 
ment conducted under subsection (b). 

"(5) The quantifiable, measurable benchmarks established 
by the State to demonstrate that the program contributes to 
improvements in the areas specified in subsection (d)(1)(A). 

"(6) An assurance that the entity will obtain and submit 
documentation or other appropriate evidence from the organi- 
zation or entity that developed the service delivery model or 
models used under the program to verify that the program is 
implemented and services are delivered according to the model 
specifications. 

June 9, 2010 



251 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2951X511 SSA 



"(7) Assurances that the entity will establish procedures to 
ensure that — 

"(A) the participation of each eligible family in the pro- 
gram is voluntary; and 

"(B) services are provided to an eligible family in ac- 
cordance with the individual assessment for that family. 
"(8) Assurances that the entity will — 

"(A) submit annual reports to the Secretary regarding 
the program and activities carried out under the program 
that include such information and data as the Secretary 
shall require; and 

"(B) participate in, and cooperate with, data and infor- 
mation collection necessary for the evaluation required 
under subsection (g)(2) and other research and evaluation 
activities carried out under subsection (h)(3). 
"(9) A description of other State programs that include 
home visitation services, including, if applicable to the State, 
other programs carried out under this title with funds made 
available from allotments under section 502(c), programs fund- 
ed under title IV, title II of the Child Abuse Prevention and 
Treatment Act (relating to community-based grants for the 
prevention of child abuse and neglect), and section 645A of the 
Head Start Act (relating to Early Head Start programs). 

"(10) Other information as required by the Secretary. 
"(f) Maintenance of Effort. — Funds provided to an eligible 
entity receiving a grant under this section shall supplement, and 
not supplant, funds from other sources for early childhood home 
visitation programs or initiatives. 
"(g) Evaluation. — 

"(1) Independent, expert advisory panel. — The Sec- 
retary, in accordance with subsection (h)(1)(A), shall appoint 
an independent advisory panel consisting of experts in pro- 
gram evaluation and research, education, and early childhood 
development — 

"(A) to review, and make recommendations on, the de- 
sign and plan for the evaluation required under paragraph 
(2) within 1 year after the date of enactment of this sec- 
tion; 

"(B) to maintain and advise the Secretary regarding 
the progress of the evaluation; and 

"(C) to comment, if the panel so desires, on the report 
submitted under paragraph (3). 

"(2) Authority to conduct evaluation. — On the basis of 
the recommendations of the advisory panel under paragraph 
(1), the Secretary shall, by grant, contract, or interagency 
agreement, conduct an evaluation of the statewide needs as- 
sessments submitted under subsection (b) and the grants made 
under subsections (c) and (h)(3)(B). The evaluation shall in- 
clude — 

"(A) an analysis, on a State-by-State basis, of the re- 
sults of such assessments, including indicators of maternal 
and prenatal health and infant health and mortality, and 
State actions in response to the assessments; and 

"(B) an assessment of — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2951X511 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



252 



"(i) the effect of early childhood home visitation 
programs on child and parent outcomes, including 
with respect to each of the benchmark areas specified 
in subsection (d)(1)(A) and the participant outcomes 
described in subsection (d)(2)(B); 

"(ii) the effectiveness of such programs on dif- 
ferent populations, including the extent to which the 
ability of programs to improve participant outcomes 
varies across programs and populations; and 

"(hi) the potential for the activities conducted 
under such programs, if scaled broadly, to improve 
health care practices, eliminate health disparities, and 
improve health care system quality, efficiencies, and 
reduce costs. 

"(3) Report.— Not later than March 31, 2015, the Sec- 
retary shall submit a report to Congress on the results of the 
evaluation conducted under paragraph (2) and shall make the 
report publicly available. 
"(h) Other Provisions. — 

"(1) Intra- agency collaboration. — The Secretary shall 
ensure that the Maternal and Child Health Bureau and the 
Administration for Children and Families collaborate with re- 
spect to carrying out this section, including with respect to — 
"(A) reviewing and analyzing the statewide needs as- 
sessments required under subsection (b), the awarding and 
oversight of grants awarded under this section, the estab- 
lishment of the advisory panels required under subsections 
(d)(l)(B)(iii)(II) and (g)(1), and the evaluation and report 
required under subsection (g); and 

"(B) consulting with other Federal agencies with re- 
sponsibility for administering or evaluating programs that 
serve eligible families to coordinate and collaborate with 
respect to research related to such programs and families, 
including the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Plan- 
ning and Evaluation of the Department of Health and 
Human Services, the Centers for Disease Control and Pre- 
vention, the National Institute of Child Health and 
Human Development of the National Institutes of Health, 
the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention 
of the Department of Justice, and the Institute of Edu- 
cation Sciences of the Department of Education. 
"(2) Grants to eligible entities that are not states. — 
"(A) Indian tribes, tribal organizations, or urban 
INDIAN ORGANIZATIONS. — The Secretary shall specify re- 
quirements for eligible entities that are Indian Tribes (or 
a consortium of Indian Tribes), Tribal Organizations, or 
Urban Indian Organizations to apply for and conduct an 
early childhood home visitation program with a grant 
under this section. Such requirements shall, to the great- 
est extent practicable, be consistent with the requirements 
applicable to eligible entities that are States and shall re- 
quire an Indian Tribe (or consortium), Tribal Organization, 
or Urban Indian Organization to — 

June 9, 2010 



253 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2951X511 SSA 



"(i) conduct a needs assessment similar to the as- 
sessment required for all States under subsection (b); 
and 

"(ii) establish quantifiable, measurable 3- and 5- 
year benchmarks consistent with subsection (d)(1)(A). 
"(B) Nonprofit organizations. — If, as of the begin- 
ning of fiscal year 2012, a State has not applied or been 
approved for a grant under this section, the Secretary may 
use amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) of sub- 
section (j) that are available for expenditure under para- 
graph (3) of that subsection to make a grant to an eligible 
entity that is a nonprofit organization described in sub- 
section (k)(l)(B) to conduct an early childhood home visita- 
tion program in the State. The Secretary shall specify the 
requirements for such an organization to apply for and 
conduct the program which shall, to the greatest extent 
practicable, be consistent with the requirements applicable 
to eligible entities that are States and shall require the or- 
ganization to — 

"(i) carry out the program based on the needs as- 
sessment conducted by the State under subsection (b); 
and 

"(ii) establish quantifiable, measurable 3- and 5- 
year benchmarks consistent with subsection (d)(1)(A). 
"(3) Research and other evaluation activities. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall carry out a con- 
tinuous program of research and evaluation activities in 
order to increase knowledge about the implementation and 
effectiveness of home visiting programs, using random as- 
signment designs to the maximum extent feasible. The 
Secretary may carry out such activities directly, or through 
grants, cooperative agreements, or contracts. 

"(B) Requirements. — The Secretary shall ensure 
that— 

"(i) evaluation of a specific program or project is 
conducted by persons or individuals not directly in- 
volved in the operation of such program or project; and 
"(ii) the conduct of research and evaluation activi- 
ties includes consultation with independent research- 
ers, State officials, and developers and providers of 
home visiting programs on topics including research 
design and administrative data matching. 
"(4) Report and recommendation. — Not later than De- 
cember 31, 2015, the Secretary shall submit a report to Con- 
gress regarding the programs conducted with grants under this 
section. The report required under this paragraph shall in- 
clude — 

"(A) information regarding the extent to which eligible 
entities receiving grants under this section demonstrated 
improvements in each of the areas specified in subsection 
(d)(1)(A); 

"(B) information regarding any technical assistance 
provided under subsection (d)(l)(B)(iii)(I), including the 
type of any such assistance provided; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2951X511 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



254 



"(C) recommendations for such legislative or adminis- 
trative action as the Secretary determines appropriate, 
"(i) Application of Other Provisions of Title. — 

"(1) In general. — Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
other provisions of this title shall not apply to a grant made 
under this section. 

"(2) Exceptions. — The following provisions of this title 
shall apply to a grant made under this section to the same ex- 
tent and in the same manner as such provisions apply to allot- 
ments made under section 502(c): 

"(A) Section 504(b)(6) (relating to prohibition on pay- 
ments to excluded individuals and entities). 

"(B) Section 504(c) (relating to the use of funds for the 
purchase of technical assistance). 

"(C) Section 504(d) (relating to a limitation on admin- 
istrative expenditures). 

"(D) Section 506 (relating to reports and audits), but 
only to the extent determined by the Secretary to be ap- 
propriate for grants made under this section. 

"(E) Section 507 (relating to penalties for false state- 
ments). 

"(F) Section 508 (relating to nondiscrimination). 
"(G) Section 509(a) (relating to the administration of 
the grant program), 
"(j) Appropriations. — 

"(1) In general. — Out of any funds in the Treasury not 
otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated to the Sec- 
retary to carry out this section — 

"(A) $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2010; 
"(B) $250,000,000 for fiscal year 2011; 
"(C) $350,000,000 for fiscal year 2012; 
"(D) $400,000,000 for fiscal year 2013; and 
"(E) $400,000,000 for fiscal year 2014. 
"(2) Reservations. — Of the amount appropriated under 
this subsection for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall reserve — 
"(A) 3 percent of such amount for purposes of making 
grants to eligible entities that are Indian Tribes (or a con- 
sortium of Indian Tribes), Tribal Organizations, or Urban 
Indian Organizations; and 

"(B) 3 percent of such amount for purposes of carrying 
out subsections (d)(l)(B)(iii), (g), and (h)(3). 
"(3) Availability. — Funds made available to an eligible 
entity under this section for a fiscal year shall remain avail- 
able for expenditure by the eligible entity through the end of 
the second succeeding fiscal year after award. Any funds that 
are not expended by the eligible entity during the period in 
which the funds are available under the preceding sentence 
may be used for grants to nonprofit organizations under sub- 
section (h)(2)(B). 

"(k) Definitions. — In this section: 
"(1) Eligible entity. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'eligible entity' means a 
State, an Indian Tribe, Tribal Organization, or Urban In- 

June 9, 2010 



255 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2952 



dian Organization, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, 
the Northern Mariana Islands, and American Samoa. 

"(B) Nonprofit organizations. — Only for purposes of 
awarding grants under subsection (h)(2)(B), such term 
shall include a nonprofit organization with an established 
record of providing early childhood home visitation pro- 
grams or initiatives in a State or several States. 
"(2) Eligible family. — The term 'eligible family' means — 

"(A) a woman who is pregnant, and the father of the 
child if the father is available; or 

"(B) a parent or primary caregiver of a child, including 
grandparents or other relatives of the child, and foster par- 
ents, who are serving as the child's primary caregiver from 
birth to kindergarten entry, and including a noncustodial 
parent who has an ongoing relationship with, and at times 
provides physical care for, the child. 

"(3) Indian tribe; tribal organization. — The terms 'In- 
dian Tribe' and 'Tribal Organization', and 'Urban Indian Orga- 
nization' have the meanings given such terms in section 4 of 
the Indian Health Care Improvement Act.". 

SEC. 2952 [42 U.S.C. 712 note]. SUPPORT, EDUCATION, AND RESEARCH 
FOR POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION. 

(a) Research on Postpartum Conditions. — 

(1) Expansion and intensification of activities. — The 
Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this subsection 
and subsection (c) referred to as the "Secretary") is encouraged 
to continue activities on postpartum depression or postpartum 
psychosis (in this subsection and subsection (c) referred to as 
"postpartum conditions"), including research to expand the un- 
derstanding of the causes of, and treatments for, postpartum 
conditions. Activities under this paragraph shall include con- 
ducting and supporting the following: 

(A) Basic research concerning the etiology and causes 
of the conditions. 

(B) Epidemiological studies to address the frequency 
and natural history of the conditions and the differences 
among racial and ethnic groups with respect to the condi- 
tions. 

(C) The development of improved screening and diag- 
nostic techniques. 

(D) Clinical research for the development and evalua- 
tion of new treatments. 

(E) Information and education programs for health 
care professionals and the public, which may include a co- 
ordinated national campaign to increase the awareness 
and knowledge of postpartum conditions. Activities under 
such a national campaign may — 

(i) include public service announcements through 
television, radio, and other means; and 

(ii) focus on — 

(I) raising awareness about screening; 

(II) educating new mothers and their families 
about postpartum conditions to promote earlier di- 
agnosis and treatment; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2952\512 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



256 



(III) ensuring that such education includes 
complete information concerning postpartum con- 
ditions, including its symptoms, methods of coping 
with the illness, and treatment resources. 
(2) Sense of congress regarding longitudinal study 
of relatd7e mental health consequences for women of 
resolving a pregnancy. — 

(A) Sense of congress. — It is the sense of Congress 
that the Director of the National Institute of Mental 
Health may conduct a nationally representative longitu- 
dinal study (during the period of fiscal years 2010 through 
2019) of the relative mental health consequences for 
women of resolving a pregnancy (intended and unintended) 
in various ways, including carrying the pregnancy to term 
and parenting the child, carrying the pregnancy to term 
and placing the child for adoption, miscarriage, and having 
an abortion. This study may assess the incidence, timing, 
magnitude, and duration of the immediate and long-term 
mental health consequences (positive or negative) of these 
pregnancy outcomes. 

(B) Report. — Subject to the completion of the study 
under subsection (a), beginning not later than 5 years 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, and periodi- 
cally thereafter for the duration of the study, such Director 
may prepare and submit to the Congress reports on the 
findings of the study. 

(b) Grants To Provide Services to Individuals With a 
Postpartum Condition and Their Families. — Title V of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 701 et seq.), as amended by section 
2951, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: 

"sec. 512 [42 u.s.c. 712]. services to individuals with a 
postpartum condition and their families. 

"(a) In General. — In addition to any other payments made 
under this title to a State, the Secretary may make grants to eligi- 
ble entities for projects for the establishment, operation, and co- 
ordination of effective and cost-efficient systems for the delivery of 
essential services to individuals with or at risk for postpartum con- 
ditions and their families. 

"(b) Certain Activities. — To the extent practicable and appro- 
priate, the Secretary shall ensure that projects funded under sub- 
section (a) provide education and services with respect to the diag- 
nosis and management of postpartum conditions for individuals 
with or at risk for postpartum conditions and their families. The 
Secretary may allow such projects to include the following: 

"(1) Delivering or enhancing outpatient and home-based 

health and support services, including case management and 

comprehensive treatment services. 

"(2) Delivering or enhancing inpatient care management 

services that ensure the well-being of the mother and family 

and the future development of the infant. 

"(3) Improving the quality, availability, and organization of 

health care and support services (including transportation 

services, attendant care, homemaker services, day or respite 

June 9, 2010 



257 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2952X512 SSA 



care, and providing counseling on financial assistance and in- 
surance). 

"(4) Providing education about postpartum conditions to 
promote earlier diagnosis and treatment. Such education may 
include — 

"(A) providing complete information on postpartum 
conditions, symptoms, methods of coping with the illness, 
and treatment resources; and 

"(B) in the case of a grantee that is a State, hospital, 
or birthing facility — 

"(i) providing education to new mothers and fa- 
thers, and other family members as appropriate, con- 
cerning postpartum conditions before new mothers 
leave the health facility; and 

"(ii) ensuring that training programs regarding 
such education are carried out at the health facility. 
"(c) Integration With Other Programs. — To the extent prac- 
ticable and appropriate, the Secretary may integrate the grant pro- 
gram under this section with other grant programs carried out by 
the Secretary, including the program under section 330 of the Pub- 
lic Health Service Act. 

"(d) Requirements. — The Secretary shall establish require- 
ments for grants made under this section that include a limit on 
the amount of grants funds that may be used for administration, 
accounting, reporting, or program oversight functions and a re- 
quirement for each eligible entity that receives a grant to submit, 
for each grant period, a report to the Secretary that describes how 
grant funds were used during such period. 

"(e) Technical Assistance. — The Secretary may provide tech- 
nical assistance to entities seeking a grant under this section in 
order to assist such entities in complying with the requirements of 
this section. 

"(f) Application of Other Provisions of Title. — 

"(1) In general. — Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
other provisions of this title shall not apply to a grant made 
under this section. 

"(2) Exceptions. — The following provisions of this title 
shall apply to a grant made under this section to the same ex- 
tent and in the same manner as such provisions apply to allot- 
ments made under section 502(c): 

"(A) Section 504(b)(6) (relating to prohibition on pay- 
ments to excluded individuals and entities). 

"(B) Section 504(c) (relating to the use of funds for the 
purchase of technical assistance). 

"(C) Section 504(d) (relating to a limitation on admin- 
istrative expenditures). 

"(D) Section 506 (relating to reports and audits), but 
only to the extent determined by the Secretary to be ap- 
propriate for grants made under this section. 

"(E) Section 507 (relating to penalties for false state- 
ments). 

"(F) Section 508 (relating to nondiscrimination). 
"(G) Section 509(a) (relating to the administration of 
the grant program). 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2952 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



258 



"(g) Definitions. — In this section: 
"(1) The term 'eligible entity'— 

"(A) means a public or nonprofit private entity; and 
"(B) includes a State or local government, public-pri- 
vate partnership, recipient of a grant under section 330H 
of the Public Health Service Act (relating to the Healthy 
Start Initiative), public or nonprofit private hospital, com- 
munity-based organization, hospice, ambulatory care facil- 
ity, community health center, migrant health center, pub- 
lic housing primary care center, or homeless health center. 
"(2) The term 'postpartum condition' means postpartum 

depression or postpartum psychosis.". 

(c) General Provisions. — 

(1) Authorization of appropriations. — To carry out this 
section and the amendment made by subsection (b), there are 
authorized to be appropriated, in addition to such other sums 
as may be available for such purpose — 

(A) $3,000,000 for fiscal year 2010; and 

(B) such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 
2011 and 2012. 

(2) Report by the secretary. — 

(A) Study. — The Secretary shall conduct a study on 
the benefits of screening for postpartum conditions. 

(B) Report. — Not later than 2 years after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall complete the 
study required by subparagraph (A) and submit a report 
to the Congress on the results of such study. 

SEC. 2953. PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY EDUCATION. 

Title V of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 701 et seq.), as 
amended by sections 2951 and 2952(c), is amended by adding at 
the end the following: 

"SEC. 513 [42 U.S.C. 713]. PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY EDUCATION. 

"(a) Allotments to States. — 
"(1) Amount. — 

"(A) In general. — For the purpose described in sub- 
section (b), subject to the succeeding provisions of this sec- 
tion, for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014, the Sec- 
retary shall allot to each State an amount equal to the 
product of — 

"(i) the amount appropriated under subsection (f) 
for the fiscal year and available for allotments to 
States after the application of subsection (c); and 

"(ii) the State youth population percentage deter- 
mined under paragraph (2). 
"(B) Minimum allotment. — 

"(i) In general. — Each State allotment under this 
paragraph for a fiscal year shall be at least $250,000. 

"(ii) Pro rata adjustments. — The Secretary shall 
adjust on a pro rata basis the amount of the State al- 
lotments determined under this paragraph for a fiscal 
year to the extent necessary to comply with clause (i). 
"(C) Application required to access allotments. — 

June 9, 2010 



259 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2953X513 SSA 



"(i) In general. — A State shall not be paid from 
its allotment for a fiscal year unless the State submits 
an application to the Secretary for the fiscal year and 
the Secretary approves the application (or requires 
changes to the application that the State satisfies) and 
meets such additional requirements as the Secretary 
may specify. 

"(ii) Requirements. — The State application shall 
contain an assurance that the State has complied with 
the requirements of this section in preparing and sub- 
mitting the application and shall include the following 
as well as such additional information as the Sec- 
retary may require: 

"(I) Based on data from the Centers for Dis- 
ease Control and Prevention National Center for 
Health Statistics, the most recent pregnancy rates 
for the State for youth ages 10 to 14 and youth 
ages 15 to 19 for which data are available, the 
most recent birth rates for such youth populations 
in the State for which data are available, and 
trends in those rates for the most recently pre- 
ceding 5-year period for which such data are avail- 
able. 

"(II) State-established goals for reducing the 
pregnancy rates and birth rates for such youth 
populations. 

"(Ill) A description of the State's plan for 
using the State allotments provided under this 
section to achieve such goals, especially among 
youth populations that are the most high-risk or 
vulnerable for pregnancies or otherwise have spe- 
cial circumstances, including youth in foster care, 
homeless youth, youth with HIV/AIDS, pregnant 
youth who are under 21 years of age, mothers who 
are under 21 years of age, and youth residing in 
areas with high birth rates for youth. 
"(2) State youth population percentage. — 

"(A) In general. — For purposes of paragraph 
(l)(A)(ii), the State youth population percentage is, with 
respect to a State, the proportion (expressed as a percent- 
age) of — 

"(i) the number of individuals who have attained 
age 10 but not attained age 20 in the State; to 

"(ii) the number of such individuals in all States. 
"(B) Determination of number of youth. — The 
number of individuals described in clauses (i) and (ii) of 
subparagraph (A) in a State shall be determined on the 
basis of the most recent Bureau of the Census data. 
"(3) Availability of state allotments. — Subject to para- 
graph (4)(A), amounts allotted to a State pursuant to this sub- 
section for a fiscal year shall remain available for expenditure 
by the State through the end of the second succeeding fiscal 
year. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2953X513 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



260 



"(4) Authority to award grants from state allot- 
ments TO LOCAL ORGANIZATIONS AND ENTITIES IN NONPARTICI- 
PATING STATES. — 

"(A) Grants from unexpended allotments. — If a 
State does not submit an application under this section for 
fiscal year 2010 or 2011, the State shall no longer be eligi- 
ble to submit an application to receive funds from the 
amounts allotted for the State for each of fiscal years 2010 
through 2014 and such amounts shall be used by the Sec- 
retary to award grants under this paragraph for each of 
fiscal years 2012 through 2014. The Secretary also shall 
use any amounts from the allotments of States that submit 
applications under this section for a fiscal year that re- 
main unexpended as of the end of the period in which the 
allotments are available for expenditure under paragraph 
(3) for awarding grants under this paragraph. 

"(B) 3-YEAR GRANTS. — 

"(i) In general. — The Secretary shall solicit appli- 
cations to award 3-year grants in each of fiscal years 
2012, 2013, and 2014 to local organizations and enti- 
ties to conduct, consistent with subsection (b), pro- 
grams and activities in States that do not submit an 
application for an allotment under this section for fis- 
cal year 2010 or 2011. 

"(ii) Faith-based organizations or consortia. — 
The Secretary may solicit and award grants under this 
paragraph to faith-based organizations or consortia. 
"(C) Evaluation. — An organization or entity awarded 

a grant under this paragraph shall agree to participate in 

a rigorous Federal evaluation. 

"(5) Maintenance of effort. — No payment shall be made 
to a State from the allotment determined for the State under 
this subsection or to a local organization or entity awarded a 
grant under paragraph (4), if the expenditure of non-federal 
funds by the State, organization, or entity for activities, pro- 
grams, or initiatives for which amounts from allotments and 
grants under this subsection may be expended is less than the 
amount expended by the State, organization, or entity for such 
programs or initiatives for fiscal year 2009. 

"(6) Data collection and reporting. — A State or local 
organization or entity receiving funds under this section shall 
cooperate with such requirements relating to the collection of 
data and information and reporting on outcomes regarding the 
programs and activities carried out with such funds, as the 
Secretary shall specify. 
"(b) Purpose. — 

"(1) In general. — The purpose of an allotment under sub- 
section (a)(1) to a State is to enable the State (or, in the case 
of grants made under subsection (a)(4)(B), to enable a local or- 
ganization or entity) to carry out personal responsibility edu- 
cation programs consistent with this subsection. 

"(2) Personal responsibility education programs. — 

June 9, 2010 



261 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2953X513 SSA 



"(A) In general. — In this section, the term 'personal 
responsibility education program' means a program that is 
designed to educate adolescents on — 

"(i) both abstinence and contraception for the pre- 
vention of pregnancy and sexually transmitted infec- 
tions, including HIV/AIDS, consistent with the re- 
quirements of subparagraph (B); and 

"(ii) at least 3 of the adulthood preparation sub- 
jects described in subparagraph (C). 
"(B) Requirements. — The requirements of this sub- 
paragraph are the following: 

"(i) The program replicates evidence-based effec- 
tive programs or substantially incorporates elements 
of effective programs that have been proven on the 
basis of rigorous scientific research to change behav- 
ior, which means delaying sexual activity, increasing 
condom or contraceptive use for sexually active youth, 
or reducing pregnancy among youth. 

"(ii) The program is medically-accurate and com- 
plete. 

"(hi) The program includes activities to educate 
youth who are sexually active regarding responsible 
sexual behavior with respect to both abstinence and 
the use of contraception. 

"(iv) The program places substantial emphasis on 
both abstinence and contraception for the prevention 
of pregnancy among youth and sexually transmitted 
infections. 

"(v) The program provides age-appropriate infor- 
mation and activities. 

"(vi) The information and activities carried out 
under the program are provided in the cultural con- 
text that is most appropriate for individuals in the 
particular population group to which they are directed. 
"(C) Adulthood preparation subjects. — The adult- 
hood preparation subjects described in this subparagraph 
are the following: 

"(i) Healthy relationships, including marriage and 
family interactions. [Replaced by section 10201(h)~\ 

"(ii) Adolescent development, such as the develop- 
ment of healthy attitudes and values about adolescent 
growth and development, body image, racial and eth- 
nic diversity, and other related subjects. 

"(hi) Financial literacy. 

"(iv) Parent-child communication. 

"(v) Educational and career success, such as devel- 
oping skills for employment preparation, job seeking, 
independent living, financial self-sufficiency, and 
workplace productivity. 

"(vi) Healthy life skills, such as goal-setting, deci- 
sion making, negotiation, communication and inter- 
personal skills, and stress management. 
"(c) Reservations of Funds. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2953X513 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



262 



"(1) Grants to implement innovative strategies. — 
From the amount appropriated under subsection (f) for the fis- 
cal year, the Secretary shall reserve $10,000,000 of such 
amount for purposes of awarding grants to entities to imple- 
ment innovative youth pregnancy prevention strategies and 
target services to high-risk, vulnerable, and culturally under- 
represented youth populations, including youth in foster care, 
homeless youth, youth with HIV/AIDS, pregnant women who 
are under 21 years of age and their partners, mothers who are 
under 21 years of age and their partners, and youth residing 
in areas with high birth rates for youth. An entity awarded a 
grant under this paragraph shall agree to participate in a rig- 
orous Federal evaluation of the activities carried out with 
grant funds. 

"(2) Other reservations. — From the amount appro- 
priated under subsection (f) for the fiscal year that remains 
after the application of paragraph (1), the Secretary shall re- 
serve the following amounts: 

"(A) Grants for Indian tribes or tribal organiza- 
tions. — The Secretary shall reserve 5 percent of such re- 
mainder for purposes of awarding grants to Indian tribes 
and tribal organizations in such manner, and subject to 
such requirements, as the Secretary, in consultation with 
Indian tribes and tribal organizations, determines appro- 
priate. 

"(B) Secretarial responsibilities. — 

"(i) Reservation of funds. — The Secretary shall 
reserve 10 percent of such remainder for expenditures 
by the Secretary for the activities described in clauses 
(ii) and (hi). 

"(ii) Program support. — The Secretary shall pro- 
vide, directly or through a competitive grant process, 
research, training and technical assistance, including 
dissemination of research and information regarding 
effective and promising practices, providing consulta- 
tion and resources on a broad array of teen pregnancy 
prevention strategies, including abstinence and contra- 
ception, and developing resources and materials to 
support the activities of recipients of grants and other 
State, tribal, and community organizations working to 
reduce teen pregnancy. In carrying out such functions, 
the Secretary shall collaborate with a variety of enti- 
ties that have expertise in the prevention of teen preg- 
nancy, HIV and sexually transmitted infections, 
healthy relationships, financial literacy, and other top- 
ics addressed through the personal responsibility edu- 
cation programs. 

"(hi) Evaluation. — The Secretary shall evaluate 
the programs and activities carried out with funds 
made available through allotments or grants under 
this section. 
"(d) Administration. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall administer this sec- 
tion through the Assistant Secretary for the Administration for 

June 9, 2010 



263 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2954 



Children and Families within the Department of Health and 

Human Services. 

"(2) Application of other provisions of title. — 

"(A) In general. — Except as provided in subpara- 
graph (B), the other provisions of this title shall not apply 
to allotments or grants made under this section. 

"(B) Exceptions. — The following provisions of this 
title shall apply to allotments and grants made under this 
section to the same extent and in the same manner as 
such provisions apply to allotments made under section 
502(c): 

"(i) Section 504(b)(6) (relating to prohibition on 
payments to excluded individuals and entities). 

"(ii) Section 504(c) (relating to the use of funds for 
the purchase of technical assistance). 

"(hi) Section 504(d) (relating to a limitation on ad- 
ministrative expenditures). 

"(iv) Section 506 (relating to reports and audits), 
but only to the extent determined by the Secretary to 
be appropriate for grants made under this section. 

"(v) Section 507 (relating to penalties for false 
statements). 

"(vi) Section 508 (relating to nondiscrimination). 
"(e) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(1) Age-appropriate. — The term 'age-appropriate', with 
respect to the information in pregnancy prevention, means top- 
ics, messages, and teaching methods suitable to particular ages 
or age groups of children and adolescents, based on developing 
cognitive, emotional, and behavioral capacity typical for the 
age or age group. 

"(2) Medically accurate and complete. — The term 
'medically accurate and complete' means verified or supported 
by the weight of research conducted in compliance with accept- 
ed scientific methods and — 

"(A) published in peer-reviewed journals, where appli- 
cable; or 

"(B) comprising information that leading professional 
organizations and agencies with relevant expertise in the 
field recognize as accurate, objective, and complete. 
"(3) Indian tribes; tribal organizations. — The terms 'In- 
dian tribe' and 'Tribal organization' have the meanings given 
such terms in section 4 of the Indian Health Care Improve- 
ment Act (25 U.S.C. 1603)). 

"(4) Youth. — The term 'youth' means an individual who 
has attained age 10 but has not attained age 20. 
"(f) Appropriation. — For the purpose of carrying out this sec- 
tion, there is appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury not 
otherwise appropriated, $75,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2010 
through 2014. Amounts appropriated under this subsection shall 
remain available until expended.". 

SEC. 2954. RESTORATION OF FUNDING FOR ABSTINENCE EDUCATION. 

Section 510 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 710) is 
amended — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2955 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



264 



(1) in subsection (a), by striking "fiscal year 1998 and each 
subsequent fiscal year" and inserting "each of fiscal years 2010 
through 2014"; and 

(2) in subsection (d) — 

(A) in the first sentence, by striking "1998 through 
2003" and inserting "2010 through 2014"; and 

(B) in the second sentence, by inserting "(except that 
such appropriation shall be made on the date of enactment 
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act in the 
case of fiscal year 2010)" before the period. 

SEC. 2955. INCLUSION OF INFORMATION ABOUT THE IMPORTANCE OF 
HAVING A HEALTH CARE POWER OF ATTORNEY IN TRAN- 
SITION PLANNING FOR CHILDREN AGING OUT OF FOSTER 
CARE AND INDEPENDENT LD7ING PROGRAMS. 

(a) Transition Planning. — Section 475(5)(H) of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 675(5)(H)) is amended by inserting "includes 
information about the importance of designating another individual 
to make health care treatment decisions on behalf of the child if 
the child becomes unable to participate in such decisions and the 
child does not have, or does not want, a relative who would other- 
wise be authorized under State law to make such decisions, and 
provides the child with the option to execute a health care power 
of attorney, health care proxy, or other similar document recog- 
nized under State law," after "employment services,". 

(b) Independent Living Education. — Section 477(b)(3) of 
such Act (42 U.S.C. 677(b)(3)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following: 

"(K) A certification by the chief executive officer of the 
State that the State will ensure that an adolescent partici- 
pating in the program under this section are provided with 
education about the importance of designating another in- 
dividual to make health care treatment decisions on behalf 
of the adolescent if the adolescent becomes unable to par- 
ticipate in such decisions and the adolescent does not have, 
or does not want, a relative who would otherwise be au- 
thorized under State law to make such decisions, whether 
a health care power of attorney, health care proxy, or other 
similar document is recognized under State law, and how 
to execute such a document if the adolescent wants to do 
so.". 

(c) Health Oversight and Coordination Plan. — Section 
422(b)(15)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 622(b)(15)(A)) is amended— 

(1) in clause (v), by striking "and" at the end; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following: 

"(vii) steps to ensure that the components of the 
transition plan development process required under 
section 475(5)(H) that relate to the health care needs 
of children aging out of foster care, including the re- 
quirements to include options for health insurance, in- 
formation about a health care power of attorney, 
health care proxy, or other similar document recog- 
nized under State law, and to provide the child with 
the option to execute such a document, are met; and". 

June 9, 2010 



265 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 2955 



(d) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
take effect on October 1, 2010. 



Sec. 3001 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



266 



TITLE III— IMPROVING THE QUALITY 
AND EFFICIENCY OF HEALTH CARE 

Subtitle A — Transforming the Health Care 
Delivery System 

PART 1— LINKING PAYMENT TO QUALITY 
OUTCOMES UNDER THE MEDICARE PROGRAM 

SEC. 3001. HOSPITAL VALUE-BASED PURCHASING PROGRAM. 

(a) Program. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1886 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395ww), as amended by section 4102(a) of the 
HITECH Act (Public Law 111-5), is amended by adding at the 
end the following new subsection: 
"(o) Hospital Value-Based Purchasing Program. — 
"(1) Establishment. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to the succeeding provisions 
of this subsection, the Secretary shall establish a hospital 
value-based purchasing program (in this subsection re- 
ferred to as the 'Program') under which value-based incen- 
tive payments are made in a fiscal year to hospitals that 
meet the performance standards under paragraph (3) for 
the performance period for such fiscal year (as established 
under paragraph (4)). 

"(B) Program to begin in fiscal year 2013. — The 
Program shall apply to payments for discharges occurring 
on or after October 1, 2012. 

"(C) Applicability of program to hospitals. — 

"(i) In general. — For purposes of this subsection, 
subject to clause (ii), the term 'hospital' means a sub- 
section (d) hospital (as defined in subsection (d)(1)(B)). 

"(ii) Exclusions. — The term 'hospital' shall not in- 
clude, with respect to a fiscal year, a hospital — 

"(I) that is subject to the payment reduction 
under subsection (b)(3)(B)(viii)(I) for such fiscal 
year; 

"(II) for which, during the performance period 
for such fiscal year, the Secretary has cited defi- 
ciencies that pose immediate jeopardy to the 
health or safety of patients; 

"(III) for which there are not a minimum 
number (as determined by the Secretary) of meas- 
ures that apply to the hospital for the perform- 
ance period for such fiscal year; or 

"(IV) for which there are not a minimum 
number (as determined by the Secretary) of cases 
for the measures that apply to the hospital for the 
performance period for such fiscal year, 
"(hi) Independent analysis. — For purposes of de- 
termining the minimum numbers under subclauses 
(III) and (IV) of clause (ii), the Secretary shall have 

June 9, 2010 



267 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3001 



conducted an independent analysis of what numbers 
are appropriate. 

"(iv) Exemption. — In the case of a hospital that is 
paid under section 1814(b)(3), the Secretary may ex- 
empt such hospital from the application of this sub- 
section if the State which is paid under such section 
submits an annual report to the Secretary describing 
how a similar program in the State for a participating 
hospital or hospitals achieves or surpasses the meas- 
ured results in terms of patient health outcomes and 
cost savings established under this subsection. 
"(2) Measures.— 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall select meas- 
ures, other than measures of readmissions, for purposes of 
the Program. Such measures shall be selected from the 
measures specified under subsection (b)(3)(B)(viii). [As re- 
vised by section 10335] 
"(B) Requirements. — 

"(i) For fiscal year 2013. — For value-based incen- 
tive payments made with respect to discharges occur- 
ring during fiscal year 2013, the Secretary shall en- 
sure the following: 

"(I) Conditions or procedures. — Measures 
are selected under subparagraph (A) that cover at 
least the following 5 specific conditions or proce- 
dures: 

"(aa) Acute myocardial infarction (AMI), 
"(bb) Heart failure, 
"(cc) Pneumonia. 

"(dd) Surgeries, as measured by the Sur- 
gical Care Improvement Project (formerly re- 
ferred to as 'Surgical Infection Prevention' for 
discharges occurring before July 2006). 

"(ee) Healthcare-associated infections, as 
measured by the prevention metrics and tar- 
gets established in the HHS Action Plan to 
Prevent Healthcare-Associated Infections (or 
any successor plan) of the Department of 
Health and Human Services. 
"(II) HCAHPS.— Measures selected under sub- 
paragraph (A) shall be related to the Hospital 
Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers 
and Systems survey (HCAHPS). 
"(ii) Inclusion of efficiency measures. — For 
value-based incentive payments made with respect to 
discharges occurring during fiscal year 2014 or a sub- 
sequent fiscal year, the Secretary shall ensure that 
measures selected under subparagraph (A) include ef- 
ficiency measures, including measures of 'Medicare 
spending per beneficiary'. Such measures shall be ad- 
justed for factors such as age, sex, race, severity of ill- 
ness, and other factors that the Secretary determines 
appropriate. 
"(C) Limitations. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3001 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



268 



"(i) Time requirement for prior reporting and 
notice. — The Secretary may not select a measure 
under subparagraph (A) for use under the Program 
with respect to a performance period for a fiscal year 
(as established under paragraph (4)) unless such 
measure has been specified under subsection 
(b)(3)(B)(viii) and included on the Hospital Compare 
Internet website for at least 1 year prior to the begin- 
ning of such performance period. 

"(ii) Measure not applicable unless hospital 

FURNISHES SERVICES APPROPRIATE TO THE MEASURE. — 

A measure selected under subparagraph (A) shall not 
apply to a hospital if such hospital does not furnish 
services appropriate to such measure. 
"(D) Replacing measures. — Subclause (VI) of sub- 
section (b)(3)(B)(viii) shall apply to measures selected 
under subparagraph (A) in the same manner as such sub- 
clause applies to measures selected under such subsection. 
"(3) Performance standards. — 

"(A) Establishment. — The Secretary shall establish 
performance standards with respect to measures selected 
under paragraph (2) for a performance period for a fiscal 
year (as established under paragraph (4)). 

"(B) Achievement and improvement. — The perform- 
ance standards established under subparagraph (A) shall 
include levels of achievement and improvement. 

"(C) Timing. — The Secretary shall establish and an- 
nounce the performance standards under subparagraph (A) 
not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of the per- 
formance period for the fiscal year involved. 

"(D) Considerations in establishing standards. — 
In establishing performance standards with respect to 
measures under this paragraph, the Secretary shall take 
into account appropriate factors, such as — 

"(i) practical experience with the measures in- 
volved, including whether a significant proportion of 
hospitals failed to meet the performance standard dur- 
ing previous performance periods; 

"(ii) historical performance standards; 
"(hi) improvement rates; and 
"(iv) the opportunity for continued improvement. 
"(4) Performance period. — For purposes of the Program, 
the Secretary shall establish the performance period for a fiscal 
year. Such performance period shall begin and end prior to the 
beginning of such fiscal year. 

"(5) Hospital performance score. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
Secretary shall develop a methodology for assessing the 
total performance of each hospital based on performance 
standards with respect to the measures selected under 
paragraph (2) for a performance period (as established 
under paragraph (4)). Using such methodology, the Sec- 
retary shall provide for an assessment (in this subsection 

June 9, 2010 



269 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3001 



referred to as the 'hospital performance score') for each 

hospital for each performance period. 
"(B) Application. — 

"(i) Appropriate distribution. — The Secretary 
shall ensure that the application of the methodology 
developed under subparagraph (A) results in an appro- 
priate distribution of value-based incentive payments 
under paragraph (6) among hospitals achieving dif- 
ferent levels of hospital performance scores, with hos- 
pitals achieving the highest hospital performance 
scores receiving the largest value-based incentive pay- 
ments. 

"(ii) Higher of achievement or improvement. — 
The methodology developed under subparagraph (A) 
shall provide that the hospital performance score is 
determined using the higher of its achievement or im- 
provement score for each measure. 

"(hi) Weights. — The methodology developed under 
subparagraph (A) shall provide for the assignment of 
weights for categories of measures as the Secretary de- 
termines appropriate. 

"(iv) NO MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARD. — The 
Secretary shall not set a minimum performance stand- 
ard in determining the hospital performance score for 
any hospital. 

"(v) Reflection of measures applicable to the 
hospital. — The hospital performance score for a hos- 
pital shall reflect the measures that apply to the hos- 
pital. 

"(6) Calculation of value-based incentive payments. — 
"(A) In general. — In the case of a hospital that the 
Secretary determines meets (or exceeds) the performance 
standards under paragraph (3) for the performance period 
for a fiscal year (as established under paragraph (4)), the 
Secretary shall increase the base operating DRG payment 
amount (as defined in paragraph (7)(D)), as determined 
after application of paragraph (7)(B)(i), for a hospital for 
each discharge occurring in such fiscal year by the value- 
based incentive payment amount. 

"(B) Value-based incentive payment amount. — The 
value-based incentive payment amount for each discharge 
of a hospital in a fiscal year shall be equal to the product 
of— 

"(i) the base operating DRG payment amount (as 
defined in paragraph (7)(D)) for the discharge for the 
hospital for such fiscal year; and 

"(ii) the value-based incentive payment percentage 
specified under subparagraph (C) for the hospital for 
such fiscal year. 

"(C) Value-based incentive payment percentage. — 
"(i) In general. — The Secretary shall specify a 
value-based incentive payment percentage for a hos- 
pital for a fiscal year. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3001 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



270 



"(ii) Requirements. — In specifying the value- 
based incentive payment percentage for each hospital 
for a fiscal year under clause (i), the Secretary shall 
ensure that — 

"(I) such percentage is based on the hospital 

performance score of the hospital under paragraph 

(5); and 

"(II) the total amount of value-based incentive 
payments under this paragraph to all hospitals in 
such fiscal year is equal to the total amount avail- 
able for value-based incentive payments for such 
fiscal year under paragraph (7)(A), as estimated 
by the Secretary. 
"(7) Funding for value-based incentive payments. — 

"(A) Amount. — The total amount available for value- 
based incentive payments under paragraph (6) for all hos- 
pitals for a fiscal year shall be equal to the total amount 
of reduced payments for all hospitals under subparagraph 
(B) for such fiscal year, as estimated by the Secretary. 
"(B) Adjustment to payments. — 

"(i) In general. — The Secretary shall reduce the 
base operating DRG payment amount (as defined in 
subparagraph (D)) for a hospital for each discharge in 
a fiscal year (beginning with fiscal year 2013) by an 
amount equal to the applicable percent (as defined in 
subparagraph (C)) of the base operating DRG payment 
amount for the discharge for the hospital for such fis- 
cal year. The Secretary shall make such reductions for 
all hospitals in the fiscal year involved, regardless of 
whether or not the hospital has been determined by 
the Secretary to have earned a value-based incentive 
payment under paragraph (6) for such fiscal year. 

"(ii) No effect ON other payments. — Payments 
described in items (aa) and (bb) of subparagraph 
(D)(i)(II) for a hospital shall be determined as if this 
subsection had not been enacted. 

"(C) Applicable percent defined. — For purposes of 
subparagraph (B), the term 'applicable percent' means — 
"(i) with respect to fiscal year 2013, 1.0 percent; 
"(ii) with respect to fiscal year 2014, 1.25 percent; 
"(hi) with respect to fiscal year 2015, 1.5 percent; 
"(iv) with respect to fiscal year 2016, 1.75 percent; 

and 

"(v) with respect to fiscal year 2017 and suc- 
ceeding fiscal years, 2 percent. 

"(D) Base operating drg payment amount de- 
fined. — 

"(i) In general. — Except as provided in clause (ii), 
in this subsection, the term 'base operating DRG pay- 
ment amount' means, with respect to a hospital for a 
fiscal year — 

"(I) the payment amount that would otherwise 

be made under subsection (d) (determined without 

June 9, 2010 



271 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3001 



regard to subsection (q)) for a discharge if this 
subsection did not apply; reduced by 

"(II) any portion of such payment amount that 
is attributable to — 

"(aa) payments under paragraphs (5)(A), 
(5)(B), (5)(F), and (12) of subsection (d); and 

"(bb) such other payments under sub- 
section (d) determined appropriate by the Sec- 
retary. 

"(ii) Special rules for certain hospitals. — 

"(I) Sole community hospitals and medi- 
care-dependent, SMALL RURAL HOSPITALS. — In 
the case of a medicare-dependent, small rural hos- 
pital (with respect to discharges occurring during 
fiscal year 2012 and 2013) or a sole community 
hospital, in applying subparagraph (A)(i), the pay- 
ment amount that would otherwise be made under 
subsection (d) shall be determined without regard 
to subparagraphs (I) and (L) of subsection (b)(3) 
and subparagraphs (D) and (G) of subsection 
(d)(5). 

"(II) Hospitals paid under section isi4. — In 
the case of a hospital that is paid under section 
1814(b)(3), the term 'base operating DRG payment 
amount' means the payment amount under such 
section. 

"(8) Announcement of net result of adjustments. — 
Under the Program, the Secretary shall, not later than 60 days 
prior to the fiscal year involved, inform each hospital of the ad- 
justments to payments to the hospital for discharges occurring 
in such fiscal year under paragraphs (6) and (7)(B)(i). 

"(9) NO EFFECT IN SUBSEQUENT FISCAL YEARS. — The value- 

based incentive payment under paragraph (6) and the payment 
reduction under paragraph (7)(B)(i) shall each apply only with 
respect to the fiscal year involved, and the Secretary shall not 
take into account such value-based incentive payment or pay- 
ment reduction in making payments to a hospital under this 
section in a subsequent fiscal year. 
"(10) Public reporting. — 

"(A) Hospital specific information. — 

"(i) In general. — The Secretary shall make infor- 
mation available to the public regarding the perform- 
ance of individual hospitals under the Program, in- 
cluding — 

"(I) the performance of the hospital with re- 
spect to each measure that applies to the hospital; 

"(II) the performance of the hospital with re- 
spect to each condition or procedure; and 

"(III) the hospital performance score assessing 
the total performance of the hospital, 
"(ii) Opportunity to review and submit correc- 
tions. — The Secretary shall ensure that a hospital has 
the opportunity to review, and submit corrections for, 
the information to be made public with respect to the 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3001 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



272 



hospital under clause (i) prior to such information 
being made public. 

"(hi) Website. — Such information shall be posted 
on the Hospital Compare Internet website in an easily 
understandable format. 

"(B) Aggregate information. — The Secretary shall 
periodically post on the Hospital Compare Internet website 
aggregate information on the Program, including — 

"(i) the number of hospitals receiving value-based 
incentive payments under paragraph (6) and the range 
and total amount of such value-based incentive pay- 
ments; and 

"(ii) the number of hospitals receiving less than 
the maximum value-based incentive payment avail- 
able to the hospital for the fiscal year involved and the 
range and amount of such payments. 
"(11) Implementation. — 

"(A) Appeals. — The Secretary shall establish a process 
by which hospitals may appeal the calculation of a hos- 
pital's performance assessment with respect to the per- 
formance standards established under paragraph (3)(A) 
and the hospital performance score under paragraph (5). 
The Secretary shall ensure that such process provides for 
resolution of such appeals in a timely manner. 

"(B) Limitation on review. — Except as provided in 
subparagraph (A), there shall be no administrative or judi- 
cial review under section 1869, section 1878, or otherwise 
of the following: 

"(i) The methodology used to determine the 
amount of the value-based incentive payment under 
paragraph (6) and the determination of such amount. 

"(ii) The determination of the amount of funding 
available for such value-based incentive payments 
under paragraph (7)(A) and the payment reduction 
under paragraph (7)(B)(i). 

"(hi) The establishment of the performance stand- 
ards under paragraph (3) and the performance period 
under paragraph (4). 

"(iv) The measures specified under subsection 
(b)(3)(B)(viii) and the measures selected under para- 
graph (2). 

"(v) The methodology developed under paragraph 
(5) that is used to calculate hospital performance 
scores and the calculation of such scores. 

"(vi) The validation methodology specified in sub- 
section (b)(3)(B)(viii)(XI). 

"(C) Consultation with small hospitals. — The Sec- 
retary shall consult with small rural and urban hospitals 
on the application of the Program to such hospitals. 
"(12) Promulgation of regulations. — The Secretary 
shall promulgate regulations to carry out the Program, includ- 
ing the selection of measures under paragraph (2), the method- 
ology developed under paragraph (5) that is used to calculate 
hospital performance scores, and the methodology used to de- 
June 9, 2010 



273 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3001 



termine the amount of value-based incentive payments under 
paragraph (6).". 

(2) Amendments for reporting of hospital quality in- 
formation— Section 1886(b)(3)(B)(viii) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(b)(3)(B)(viii)) is amended— 

(A) in subclause (II), by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing sentence: "The Secretary may require hospitals to 
submit data on measures that are not used for the deter- 
mination of value-based incentive payments under sub- 
section (o)."; 

(B) in subclause (V), by striking "beginning with fiscal 
year 2008" and inserting "for fiscal years 2008 through 
2012"; 

(C) in subclause (VII), in the first sentence, by striking 
"data submitted" and inserting "information regarding 
measures submitted"; and 

(D) by adding at the end the following new subclauses: 
"(VIII) Effective for payments beginning with fiscal year 2013, 

with respect to quality measures for outcomes of care, the Sec- 
retary shall provide for such risk adjustment as the Secretary de- 
termines to be appropriate to maintain incentives for hospitals to 
treat patients with severe illnesses or conditions. 

"(LX)(aa) Subject to item (bb), effective for payments beginning 
with fiscal year 2013, each measure specified by the Secretary 
under this clause shall be endorsed by the entity with a contract 
under section 1890(a). 

"(bb) In the case of a specified area or medical topic deter- 
mined appropriate by the Secretary for which a feasible and prac- 
tical measure has not been endorsed by the entity with a contract 
under section 1890(a), the Secretary may specify a measure that is 
not so endorsed as long as due consideration is given to measures 
that have been endorsed or adopted by a consensus organization 
identified by the Secretary. 

"(X) To the extent practicable, the Secretary shall, with input 
from consensus organizations and other stakeholders, take steps to 
ensure that the measures specified by the Secretary under this 
clause are coordinated and aligned with quality measures applica- 
ble to — 

"(aa) physicians under section 1848(k); and 
"(bb) other providers of services and suppliers under this 
title. 

"(XI) The Secretary shall establish a process to validate meas- 
ures specified under this clause as appropriate. Such process shall 
include the auditing of a number of randomly selected hospitals 
sufficient to ensure validity of the reporting program under this 
clause as a whole and shall provide a hospital with an opportunity 
to appeal the validation of measures reported by such hospital.". 

(3) Website improvements. — Section 1886(b)(3)(B) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(b)(3)(B)), as amended 
by section 4102(b) of the HITECH Act (Public Law 111-5), is 
amended by adding at the end the following new clause: 
"(x)(I) The Secretary shall develop standard Internet website 

reports tailored to meet the needs of various stakeholders such as 
hospitals, patients, researchers, and policymakers. The Secretary 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3001 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



274 



shall seek input from such stakeholders in determining the type of 
information that is useful and the formats that best facilitate the 
use of the information. 

"(II) The Secretary shall modify the Hospital Compare Internet 
website to make the use and navigation of that website readily 
available to individuals accessing it.". 

(4) GAO STUDY AND REPORT. — 

(A) Study. — The Comptroller General of the United 
States shall conduct a study on the performance of the 
hospital value-based purchasing program established 
under section 1886(o) of the Social Security Act, as added 
by paragraph (1). Such study shall include an analysis of 
the impact of such program on — 

(i) the quality of care furnished to Medicare bene- 
ficiaries, including diverse Medicare beneficiary popu- 
lations (such as diverse in terms of race, ethnicity, and 
socioeconomic status); 

(ii) expenditures under the Medicare program, in- 
cluding any reduced expenditures under Part A of title 
XVIII of such Act that are attributable to the improve- 
ment in the delivery of inpatient hospital services by 
reason of such hospital value-based purchasing pro- 
gram; 

(iii) the quality performance among safety net hos- 
pitals and any barriers such hospitals face in meeting 
the performance standards applicable under such hos- 
pital value-based purchasing program; and 

(iv) the quality performance among small rural 
and small urban hospitals and any barriers such hos- 
pitals face in meeting the performance standards ap- 
plicable under such hospital value-based purchasing 
program. 

(B) Reports. — 

(i) Interim report. — Not later than October 1, 
2015, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall submit to Congress an interim report containing 
the results of the study conducted under subparagraph 
(A), together with recommendations for such legisla- 
tion and administrative action as the Comptroller 
General determines appropriate. 

(ii) Final report. — Not later than July 1, 2017, 
the Comptroller General of the United States shall 
submit to Congress a report containing the results of 
the study conducted under subparagraph (A), together 
with recommendations for such legislation and admin- 
istrative action as the Comptroller General determines 
appropriate. 

(5) HHS STUDY AND REPORT. — 

(A) Study. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services shall conduct a study on the performance of the 
hospital value-based purchasing program established 
under section 1886(o) of the Social Security Act, as added 
by paragraph (1). Such study shall include an analysis — 

June 9, 2010 



275 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3001 



(i) of ways to improve the hospital value-based 
purchasing program and ways to address any unin- 
tended consequences that may occur as a result of 
such program; 

(ii) of whether the hospital value-based pur- 
chasing program resulted in lower spending under the 
Medicare program under title XVIII of such Act or 
other financial savings to hospitals; 

(iii) the appropriateness of the Medicare program 
sharing in any savings generated through the hospital 
value-based purchasing program; and 

(iv) any other area determined appropriate by the 
Secretary. 

(B) Report. — Not later than January 1, 2016, the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services shall submit to Con- 
gress a report containing the results of the study con- 
ducted under subparagraph (A), together with rec- 
ommendations for such legislation and administrative ac- 
tion as the Secretary determines appropriate. 

(b) Value-Based Purchasing Demonstration Programs. — 
(1) Value-based purchasing demonstration program 

for inpatient critical access hospitals. — 

(A) Establishment. — 

(i) In general. — Not later than 2 years after the 
date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health 
and Human Services (in this subsection referred to as 
the "Secretary") shall establish a demonstration pro- 
gram under which the Secretary establishes a value- 
based purchasing program under the Medicare pro- 
gram under title XVIII of the Social Security Act for 
critical access hospitals (as defined in paragraph (1) of 
section 1861(mm) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(mm))) 
with respect to inpatient critical access hospital serv- 
ices (as defined in paragraph (2) of such section) in 
order to test innovative methods of measuring and re- 
warding quality and efficient health care furnished by 
such hospitals. 

(ii) Duration. — The demonstration program 
under this paragraph shall be conducted for a 3-year 
period. 

(iii) Sites. — The Secretary shall conduct the dem- 
onstration program under this paragraph at an appro- 
priate number (as determined by the Secretary) of crit- 
ical access hospitals. The Secretary shall ensure that 
such hospitals are representative of the spectrum of 
such hospitals that participate in the Medicare pro- 
gram. 

(B) Waiver authority. — The Secretary may waive 
such requirements of titles XI and XVIII of the Social Se- 
curity Act as may be necessary to carry out the demonstra- 
tion program under this paragraph. 

(C) Budget neutrality requirement. — In conducting 
the demonstration program under this section, the Sec- 
retary shall ensure that the aggregate payments made by 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3001 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



276 



the Secretary do not exceed the amount which the Sec- 
retary would have paid if the demonstration program 
under this section was not implemented. 

(D) Report. — Not later than 18 months after the com- 
pletion of the demonstration program under this para- 
graph, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on 
the demonstration program together with — 

(i) recommendations on the establishment of a 
permanent value-based purchasing program under the 
Medicare program for critical access hospitals with re- 
spect to inpatient critical access hospital services; and 

(ii) recommendations for such other legislation 
and administrative action as the Secretary determines 
appropriate. 

(2) Value-based purchasing demonstration program 
for hospitals excluded from hospital value-based pur- 
chasing program as a result of insufficient numbers of 
measures and cases. — 

(A) Establishment. — 

(i) In general. — Not later than 2 years after the 
date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall es- 
tablish a demonstration program under which the Sec- 
retary establishes a value-based purchasing program 
under the Medicare program under title XVIII of the 
Social Security Act for applicable hospitals (as defined 
in clause (ii)) with respect to inpatient hospital serv- 
ices (as defined in section 1861(b) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(b))) in order to test innova- 
tive methods of measuring and rewarding quality and 
efficient health care furnished by such hospitals. 

(ii) Applicable hospital defined. — For purposes 
of this paragraph, the term "applicable hospital" 
means a hospital described in subclause (III) or (IV) of 
section 1886(o)(l)(C)(ii) of the Social Security Act, as 
added by subsection (a)(1). 

(iii) Duration. — The demonstration program 
under this paragraph shall be conducted for a 3-year 
period. 

(iv) Sites. — The Secretary shall conduct the dem- 
onstration program under this paragraph at an appro- 
priate number (as determined by the Secretary) of ap- 
plicable hospitals. The Secretary shall ensure that 
such hospitals are representative of the spectrum of 
such hospitals that participate in the Medicare pro- 
gram. 

(B) Waiver authority. — The Secretary may waive 
such requirements of titles XI and XVIII of the Social Se- 
curity Act as may be necessary to carry out the demonstra- 
tion program under this paragraph. 

(C) Budget neutrality requirement. — In conducting 
the demonstration program under this section, the Sec- 
retary shall ensure that the aggregate payments made by 
the Secretary do not exceed the amount which the Sec- 
June 9, 2010 



277 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3002 



retary would have paid if the demonstration program 
under this section was not implemented. 

(D) Report. — Not later than 18 months after the com- 
pletion of the demonstration program under this para- 
graph, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on 
the demonstration program together with — 

(i) recommendations on the establishment of a 
permanent value-based purchasing program under the 
Medicare program for applicable hospitals with respect 
to inpatient hospital services; and 

(ii) recommendations for such other legislation 
and administrative action as the Secretary determines 
appropriate. 

SEC. 3002. IMPROVEMENTS TO THE PHYSICIAN QUALITY REPORTING 
SYSTEM. 

(a) Extension. — Section 1848(m) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395w-4(m)) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (1) — 

(A) in subparagraph (A), in the matter preceding 
clause (i), by striking "2010" and inserting "2014"; and 

(B) in subparagraph (B) — 

(i) in clause (i), by striking "and" at the end; 

(ii) in clause (ii), by striking the period at the end 
and inserting a semicolon; and 

(iii) by adding at the end the following new 

"(iii) for 2011, 1.0 percent; and 

"(iv) for 2012, 2013, and 2014, 0.5 percent."; 

(2) in paragraph (3) — 

(A) in subparagraph (A), in the matter preceding 
clause (i), by inserting "(or, for purposes of subsection 
(a)(8), for the quality reporting period for the year)" after 
"reporting period"; and 

(B) in subparagraph (C)(i), by inserting ", or, for pur- 
poses of subsection (a)(8), for a quality reporting period for 
the year" after "(a)(5), for a reporting period for a year"; 

(3) in paragraph (5)(E)(iv), by striking "subsection 

(a) (5)(A)" and inserting "paragraphs (5)(A) and (8)(A) of sub- 
section (a)"; and 

(4) in paragraph (6)(C) — 

(A) in clause (i)(II), by striking ", 2009, 2010, and 
2011" and inserting "and subsequent years"; and 

(B) in clause (iii) — 

(i) by inserting "(a)(8)" after "(a)(5)"; and 

(ii) by striking "under subparagraph (D)(iii) of 
such subsection" and inserting "under subsection 
(a)(5)(D)(iii) or the quality reporting period under sub- 
section (a)(8)(D)(iii), respectively". 

(b) Incentive Payment Adjustment for Quality Report- 
ing.— Section 1848(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w- 
4(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new para- 
graph: 

"(8) Incentives for quality reporting. — 
"(A) Adjustment. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



278 



"(i) In general. — With respect to covered profes- 
sional services furnished by an eligible professional 
during 2015 or any subsequent year, if the eligible 
professional does not satisfactorily submit data on 
quality measures for covered professional services for 
the quality reporting period for the year (as deter- 
mined under subsection (m)(3)(A)), the fee schedule 
amount for such services furnished by such profes- 
sional during the year (including the fee schedule 
amount for purposes of determining a payment based 
on such amount) shall be equal to the applicable per- 
cent of the fee schedule amount that would otherwise 
apply to such services under this subsection (deter- 
mined after application of paragraphs (3), (5), and (7), 
but without regard to this paragraph). 

"(ii) Applicable percent. — For purposes of clause 
(i), the term 'applicable percent' means — 
"(I) for 2015, 98.5 percent; and 
"(II) for 2016 and each subsequent year, 98 

percent. 
"(B) Application. — 

"(i) Physician reporting system rules. — Para- 
graphs (5), (6), and (8) of subsection (k) shall apply for 
purposes of this paragraph in the same manner as 
they apply for purposes of such subsection. 

"(ii) Incentive payment validation rules. — 
Clauses (ii) and (iii) of subsection (m)(5)(D) shall apply 
for purposes of this paragraph in a similar manner as 
they apply for purposes of such subsection. 
"(C) Definitions. — For purposes of this paragraph: 

"(i) Eligible professional; covered profes- 
sional services. — The terms 'eligible professional' 
and 'covered professional services' have the meanings 
given such terms in subsection (k)(3). 

"(ii) Physician reporting system. — The term 
'physician reporting system' means the system estab- 
lished under subsection (k). 

"(iii) Quality reporting period. — The term 'qual- 
ity reporting period' means, with respect to a year, a 
period specified by the Secretary.", 
(c) Maintenance of Certification Programs. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1848(k)(4) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(k)(4)) is amended by inserting "or 
through a Maintenance of Certification program operated by a 
specialty body of the American Board of Medical Specialties 
that meets the criteria for such a registry" after "Database)". 

(2) Effective date. — The amendment made by paragraph 
(1) shall apply for years after 2010. 

(3) Authority. — For years after 2014, if the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services determines it to be appropriate, 
the Secretary may incorporate participation in a Maintenance 
of Certification Program and successful completion of a quali- 
fied Maintenance of Certification Program practice assessment 
into the composite of measures of quality of care furnished pur- 
June 9, 2010 



279 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3003 



suant to the physician fee schedule payment modifier, as de- 
scribed in section 1848(p)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395w-4(p)(2)). [As added by section 10327(b)] 

(d) Integration of Physician Quality Reporting and EHR 
Reporting. — Section 1848(m) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395w-4(m)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph: 

"(7) Integration of physician quality reporting and 
EHR REPORTING. — Not later than January 1, 2012, the Sec- 
retary shall develop a plan to integrate reporting on quality 
measures under this subsection with reporting requirements 
under subsection (o) relating to the meaningful use of elec- 
tronic health records. Such integration shall consist of the fol- 
lowing: 

"(A) The selection of measures, the reporting of which 
would both demonstrate — 

"(i) meaningful use of an electronic health record 
for purposes of subsection (o); and 

"(ii) quality of care furnished to an individual. 
"(B) Such other activities as specified by the Sec- 
retary.". 

[Section 10327(a), p. 871, also added a paragraph (7) to section 
1848(m) adding an additional incentive payment relating to physi- 
cian quality reporting] 

(e) Feedback. — Section 1848(m)(5) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(m)(5)) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new subparagraph: 

"(H) Feedback. — The Secretary shall provide timely 
feedback to eligible professionals on the performance of the 
eligible professional with respect to satisfactorily submit- 
ting data on quality measures under this subsection.". 

(f) Appeals. — Such section is further amended — 

(1) in subparagraph (E), by striking "There shall" and in- 
serting "Except as provided in subparagraph (I), there shall"; 
and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: 

"(I) Informal appeals process. — The Secretary shall, 
by not later than January 1, 2011, establish and have in 
place an informal process for eligible professionals to seek 
a review of the determination that an eligible professional 
did not satisfactorily submit data on quality measures 
under this subsection.". 
[Section 10331, p. 875, also provides for public reporting of per- 
formance information for eligible professionals who participate in 
the Physician Quality Reporting Initiative] 

SEC. 3003. IMPROVEMENTS TO THE PHYSICIAN FEEDBACK PROGRAM. 

(a) In General. — Section 1848(n) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395w-4(n)) is amended— 
(1) in paragraph (1) — 

(A) in subparagraph (A) — 

(i) by striking "general. — The Secretary" and in- 
serting "general. — 

"(i) Establishment. — The Secretary"; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3003 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



280 



(ii) in clause (i), as added by clause (i), by striking 
"the 'Program')" and all that follows through the pe- 
riod at the end of the second sentence and inserting 
"the 'Program')."; and 

(iii) by adding at the end the following new 
clauses: 

"(ii) Reports on resources. — The Secretary shall 
use claims data under this title (and may use other 
data) to provide confidential reports to physicians 
(and, as determined appropriate by the Secretary, to 
groups of physicians) that measure the resources in- 
volved in furnishing care to individuals under this 
title. 

"(iii) Inclusion of certain information. — If de- 
termined appropriate by the Secretary, the Secretary 
may include information on the quality of care fur- 
nished to individuals under this title by the physician 
(or group of physicians) in such reports."; and 
(B) in subparagraph (B), by striking "subparagraph 
(A)" and inserting "subparagraph (A)(ii)"; 

(2) in paragraph (4) — 

(A) in the heading, by inserting "initial" after 
"focus"; and 

(B) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by in- 
serting "initial" after "focus the"; 

(3) in paragraph (6), by adding at the end the following 
new sentence: "For adjustments for reports on utilization 
under paragraph (9), see subparagraph (D) of such para- 
graph."; and 

(4) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: 
"(9) Reports on utilization. — 

"(A) Development of episode grouper. — 

"(i) In general. — The Secretary shall develop an 
episode grouper that combines separate but clinically 
related items and services into an episode of care for 
an individual, as appropriate. 

"(ii) Timeline for development. — The episode 
grouper described in subparagraph (A) shall be devel- 
oped by not later than January 1, 2012. 

"(iii) Public availability. — The Secretary shall 
make the details of the episode grouper described in 
subparagraph (A) available to the public. 

"(iv) Endorsement. — The Secretary shall seek en- 
dorsement of the episode grouper described in sub- 
paragraph (A) by the entity with a contract under sec- 
tion 1890(a). 

"(B) Reports on utilization. — Effective beginning 
with 2012, the Secretary shall provide reports to physi- 
cians that compare, as determined appropriate by the Sec- 
retary, patterns of resource use of the individual physician 
to such patterns of other physicians. 

"(C) Analysis of data. — The Secretary shall, for pur- 
poses of preparing reports under this paragraph, establish 
methodologies as appropriate, such as to — 

June 9, 2010 



281 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3003 



"(i) attribute episodes of care, in whole or in part, 
to physicians; 

"(ii) identify appropriate physicians for purposes 
of comparison under subparagraph (B); and 

"(hi) aggregate episodes of care attributed to a 
physician under clause (i) into a composite measure 
per individual. 

"(D) Data adjustment. — In preparing reports under 
this paragraph, the Secretary shall make appropriate ad- 
justments, including adjustments — 

"(i) to account for differences in socioeconomic and 
demographic characteristics, ethnicity, and health sta- 
tus of individuals (such as to recognize that less 
healthy individuals may require more intensive inter- 
ventions); and 

"(ii) to eliminate the effect of geographic adjust- 
ments in payment rates (as described in subsection 
(e)). 

"(E) Public availability of methodology. — The Sec- 
retary shall make available to the public — 

"(i) the methodologies established under subpara- 
graph (C); 

"(ii) information regarding any adjustments made 
to data under subparagraph (D); and 

"(hi) aggregate reports with respect to physicians. 
"(F) Definition of physician. — In this paragraph: 

"(i) In general. — The term 'physician' has the 
meaning given that term in section 1861(r)(l). 

"(ii) Treatment of groups. — Such term includes, 
as the Secretary determines appropriate, a group of 
physicians. 

"(G) Limitations on review. — There shall be no ad- 
ministrative or judicial review under section 1869, section 
1878, or otherwise of the establishment of the methodology 
under subparagraph (C), including the determination of an 
episode of care under such methodology. 
"(10) Coordination with other value-based purchasing 
REFORMS. — The Secretary shall coordinate the Program with 
the value-based payment modifier established under subsection 
(p) and, as the Secretary determines appropriate, other similar 
provisions of this title.". 

(b) Conforming Amendment. — Section 1890(b) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395aaa(b)) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new paragraph: 

"(6) Review and endorsement of episode grouper 

UNDER THE PHYSICIAN FEEDBACK PROGRAM. — The entity shall 

provide for the review and, as appropriate, the endorsement of 
the episode grouper developed by the Secretary under section 
1848(n)(9)(A). Such review shall be conducted on an expedited 
basis.". 



Sec. 3004 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



282 



SEC. 3004. QUALITY REPORTING FOR LONG-TERM CARE HOSPITALS, 
INPATIENT REHABILITATION HOSPITALS, AND HOSPICE 
PROGRAMS. 

(a) Long-term Care Hospitals. — Section 1886(m) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(m)), as amended by section 
3401(c), is amended by adding at the end the following new para- 
graph: 

"(5) Quality reporting. — 

"(A) Reduction in update for failure to report. — 

"(i) In general. — Under the system described in 
paragraph (1), for rate year 2014 and each subsequent 
rate year, in the case of a long-term care hospital that 
does not submit data to the Secretary in accordance 
with subparagraph (C) with respect to such a rate 
year, any annual update to a standard Federal rate for 
discharges for the hospital during the rate year, and 
after application of paragraph (3), shall be reduced by 
2 percentage points. 

"(ii) Special rule. — The application of this sub- 
paragraph may result in such annual update being 
less than 0.0 for a rate year, and may result in pay- 
ment rates under the system described in paragraph 
(1) for a rate year being less than such payment rates 
for the preceding rate year. 

"(B) Noncumulative application. — Any reduction 
under subparagraph (A) shall apply only with respect to 
the rate year involved and the Secretary shall not take 
into account such reduction in computing the payment 
amount under the system described in paragraph (1) for a 
subsequent rate year. 

"(C) Submission of quality data. — For rate year 
2014 and each subsequent rate year, each long-term care 
hospital shall submit to the Secretary data on quality 
measures specified under subparagraph (D). Such data 
shall be submitted in a form and manner, and at a time, 
specified by the Secretary for purposes of this subpara- 
graph. 

"(D) Quality measures. — 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), any meas- 
ure specified by the Secretary under this subpara- 
graph must have been endorsed by the entity with a 
contract under section 1890(a). 

"(ii) Exception. — In the case of a specified area or 
medical topic determined appropriate by the Secretary 
for which a feasible and practical measure has not 
been endorsed by the entity with a contract under sec- 
tion 1890(a), the Secretary may specify a measure that 
is not so endorsed as long as due consideration is 
given to measures that have been endorsed or adopted 
by a consensus organization identified by the Sec- 
retary. 

"(hi) Time frame. — Not later than October 1, 
2012, the Secretary shall publish the measures se- 

June 9, 2010 



283 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3004 



lected under this subparagraph that will be applicable 
with respect to rate year 2014. 

"(E) Public availability of data submitted. — The 
Secretary shall establish procedures for making data sub- 
mitted under subparagraph (C) available to the public. 
Such procedures shall ensure that a long-term care hos- 
pital has the opportunity to review the data that is to be 
made public with respect to the hospital prior to such data 
being made public. The Secretary shall report quality 
measures that relate to services furnished in inpatient set- 
tings in long-term care hospitals on the Internet website 
of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services.", 
(b) Inpatient Rehabilitation Hospitals. — Section 1886(j) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(j)) is amended — 

(1) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8); and 

(2) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new 
paragraph: 

"(7) Quality reporting. — 

"(A) Reduction in update for failure to report. — 
"(i) In general. — For purposes of fiscal year 2014 
and each subsequent fiscal year, in the case of a reha- 
bilitation facility that does not submit data to the Sec- 
retary in accordance with subparagraph (C) with re- 
spect to such a fiscal year, after determining the in- 
crease factor described in paragraph (3)(C), and after 
application of paragraph (3)(D), the Secretary shall re- 
duce such increase factor for payments for discharges 
occurring during such fiscal year by 2 percentage 
points. 

"(ii) Special rule. — The application of this sub- 
paragraph may result in the increase factor described 
in paragraph (3)(C) being less than 0.0 for a fiscal 
year, and may result in payment rates under this sub- 
section for a fiscal year being less than such payment 
rates for the preceding fiscal year. 
"(B) Noncumulative application. — Any reduction 
under subparagraph (A) shall apply only with respect to 
the fiscal year involved and the Secretary shall not take 
into account such reduction in computing the payment 
amount under this subsection for a subsequent fiscal year. 

"(C) Submission of quality data. — For fiscal year 
2014 and each subsequent rate year, each rehabilitation 
facility shall submit to the Secretary data on quality meas- 
ures specified under subparagraph (D). Such data shall be 
submitted in a form and manner, and at a time, specified 
by the Secretary for purposes of this subparagraph. 
"(D) Quality measures. — 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), any meas- 
ure specified by the Secretary under this subpara- 
graph must have been endorsed by the entity with a 
contract under section 1890(a). 

"(ii) Exception. — In the case of a specified area or 
medical topic determined appropriate by the Secretary 
for which a feasible and practical measure has not 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3004 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



284 



been endorsed by the entity with a contract under sec- 
tion 1890(a), the Secretary may specify a measure that 
is not so endorsed as long as due consideration is 
given to measures that have been endorsed or adopted 
by a consensus organization identified by the Sec- 
retary. 

"(hi) Time frame. — Not later than October 1, 
2012, the Secretary shall publish the measures se- 
lected under this subparagraph that will be applicable 
with respect to fiscal year 2014. 
"(E) Public availability of data submitted. — The 
Secretary shall establish procedures for making data sub- 
mitted under subparagraph (C) available to the public. 
Such procedures shall ensure that a rehabilitation facility 
has the opportunity to review the data that is to be made 
public with respect to the facility prior to such data being 
made public. The Secretary shall report quality measures 
that relate to services furnished in inpatient settings in re- 
habilitation facilities on the Internet website of the Cen- 
ters for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services.", 
(c) Hospice Programs. — Section 1814(i) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f(i)) is amended— 

(1) by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (6); and 

(2) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following new 
paragraph: 

"(5) Quality reporting. — 

"(A) Reduction in update for failure to report. — 
"(i) In general. — For purposes of fiscal year 2014 
and each subsequent fiscal year, in the case of a hos- 
pice program that does not submit data to the Sec- 
retary in accordance with subparagraph (C) with re- 
spect to such a fiscal year, after determining the mar- 
ket basket percentage increase under paragraph 
(l)(C)(ii)(VII) or paragraph (l)(C)(iii), as applicable, 
and after application of paragraph (l)(C)(iv), with re- 
spect to the fiscal year, the Secretary shall reduce 
such market basket percentage increase by 2 percent- 
age points. 

"(ii) Special rule. — The application of this sub- 
paragraph may result in the market basket percentage 
increase under paragraph (l)(C)(ii)(VII) or paragraph 
(l)(C)(iii), as applicable, being less than 0.0 for a fiscal 
year, and may result in payment rates under this sub- 
section for a fiscal year being less than such payment 
rates for the preceding fiscal year. 
"(B) Noncumulative application. — Any reduction 
under subparagraph (A) shall apply only with respect to 
the fiscal year involved and the Secretary shall not take 
into account such reduction in computing the payment 
amount under this subsection for a subsequent fiscal year. 

"(C) Submission of quality data. — For fiscal year 
2014 and each subsequent fiscal year, each hospice pro- 
gram shall submit to the Secretary data on quality meas- 
ures specified under subparagraph (D). Such data shall be 

June 9, 2010 



285 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3005 



submitted in a form and manner, and at a time, specified 
by the Secretary for purposes of this subparagraph. 
"(D) Quality measures. — 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), any meas- 
ure specified by the Secretary under this subpara- 
graph must have been endorsed by the entity with a 
contract under section 1890(a). 

"(ii) Exception. — In the case of a specified area or 
medical topic determined appropriate by the Secretary 
for which a feasible and practical measure has not 
been endorsed by the entity with a contract under sec- 
tion 1890(a), the Secretary may specify a measure that 
is not so endorsed as long as due consideration is 
given to measures that have been endorsed or adopted 
by a consensus organization identified by the Sec- 
retary. 

"(hi) Time frame. — Not later than October 1, 
2012, the Secretary shall publish the measures se- 
lected under this subparagraph that will be applicable 
with respect to fiscal year 2014. 
"(E) Public availability of data submitted. — The 
Secretary shall establish procedures for making data sub- 
mitted under subparagraph (C) available to the public. 
Such procedures shall ensure that a hospice program has 
the opportunity to review the data that is to be made pub- 
lic with respect to the hospice program prior to such data 
being made public. The Secretary shall report quality 
measures that relate to hospice care provided by hospice 
programs on the Internet website of the Centers for Medi- 
care &amp; Medicaid Services.". 

SEC. 3005. QUALITY REPORTING FOR PPS-EXEMPT CANCER HOS- 
PITALS. 

Section 1866 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc) is 
amended — 

(1) in subsection (a)(1) — 

(A) in subparagraph (U), by striking "and" at the end; 

(B) in subparagraph (V), by striking the period at the 
end and inserting ", and"; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following new subpara- 
graph: 

"(W) in the case of a hospital described in section 
1886(d)(l)(B)(v), to report quality data to the Secretary in 
accordance with subsection (k)."; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: 
"(k) Quality Reporting by Cancer Hospitals. — 

"(1) In general. — For purposes of fiscal year 2014 and 
each subsequent fiscal year, a hospital described in section 
1886(d)(l)(B)(v) shall submit data to the Secretary in accord- 
ance with paragraph (2) with respect to such a fiscal year. 

"(2) Submission of quality data. — For fiscal year 2014 
and each subsequent fiscal year, each hospital described in 
such section shall submit to the Secretary data on quality 
measures specified under paragraph (3). Such data shall be 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3006 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



286 



submitted in a form and manner, and at a time, specified by 
the Secretary for purposes of this subparagraph. 
"(3) Quality measures. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (B), any 
measure specified by the Secretary under this paragraph 
must have been endorsed by the entity with a contract 
under section 1890(a). 

"(B) Exception. — In the case of a specified area or 
medical topic determined appropriate by the Secretary for 
which a feasible and practical measure has not been en- 
dorsed by the entity with a contract under section 1890(a), 
the Secretary may specify a measure that is not so en- 
dorsed as long as due consideration is given to measures 
that have been endorsed or adopted by a consensus organi- 
zation identified by the Secretary. 

"(C) Time frame.— Not later than October 1, 2012, the 
Secretary shall publish the measures selected under this 
paragraph that will be applicable with respect to fiscal 
year 2014. 

"(4) Public availability of data submitted. — The Sec- 
retary shall establish procedures for making data submitted 
under paragraph (4) available to the public. Such procedures 
shall ensure that a hospital described in section 
1886(d)(l)(B)(v) has the opportunity to review the data that is 
to be made public with respect to the hospital prior to such 
data being made public. The Secretary shall report quality 
measures of process, structure, outcome, patients' perspective 
on care, efficiency, and costs of care that relate to services fur- 
nished in such hospitals on the Internet website of the Centers 
for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services.". 

SEC. 3006. PLANS FOR A VALUE-BASED PURCHASING PROGRAM FOR 
SKILLED NURSING FACILITIES AND HOME HEALTH AGEN- 
CIES. 

(a) Skilled Nursing Facilities. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services (in this section referred to as the "Secretary") shall de- 
velop a plan to implement a value-based purchasing program 
for payments under the Medicare program under title XVIII of 
the Social Security Act for skilled nursing facilities (as defined 
in section 1819(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(a))). 

(2) Details. — In developing the plan under paragraph (1), 
the Secretary shall consider the following issues: 

(A) The ongoing development, selection, and modifica- 
tion process for measures (including under section 1890 of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395aaa) and section 
1890A such Act, as added by section 3014), to the extent 
feasible and practicable, of all dimensions of quality and 
efficiency in skilled nursing facilities. [As revised by sec- 
tion 10301(b)] 

(B) The reporting, collection, and validation of quality 
data. 

(C) The structure of value-based payment adjust- 
ments, including the determination of thresholds or im- 
provements in quality that would substantiate a payment 

June 9, 2010 



287 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3006 



adjustment, the size of such payments, and the sources of 
funding for the value-based bonus payments. 

(D) Methods for the public disclosure of information on 
the performance of skilled nursing facilities. 

(E) Any other issues determined appropriate by the 
Secretary. 

(3) Consultation. — In developing the plan under para- 
graph (1), the Secretary shall — 

(A) consult with relevant affected parties; and 

(B) consider experience with such demonstrations that 
the Secretary determines are relevant to the value-based 
purchasing program described in paragraph (1). 

(4) Report to congress— Not later than October 1, 2011, 
the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report containing the 
plan developed under paragraph (1). 

(b) Home Health Agencies. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services (in this section referred to as the "Secretary") shall de- 
velop a plan to implement a value-based purchasing program 
for payments under the Medicare program under title XVIII of 
the Social Security Act for home health agencies (as defined in 
section 1861(o) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(o))). 

(2) Details. — In developing the plan under paragraph (1), 
the Secretary shall consider the following issues: 

(A) The ongoing development, selection, and modifica- 
tion process for measures (including under section 1890 of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395aaa) and section 
1890A such Act, as added by section 3014), to the extent 
feasible and practicable, of all dimensions of quality and 
efficiency in home health agencies. 

(B) The reporting, collection, and validation of quality 
data. 

(C) The structure of value-based payment adjust- 
ments, including the determination of thresholds or im- 
provements in quality that would substantiate a payment 
adjustment, the size of such payments, and the sources of 
funding for the value-based bonus payments. 

(D) Methods for the public disclosure of information on 
the performance of home health agencies. 

(E) Any other issues determined appropriate by the 
Secretary. 

(3) Consultation. — In developing the plan under para- 
graph (1), the Secretary shall — 

(A) consult with relevant affected parties; and 

(B) consider experience with such demonstrations that 
the Secretary determines are relevant to the value-based 
purchasing program described in paragraph (1). 

(4) Report to congress. — Not later than October 1, 2011, 
the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report containing the 
plan developed under paragraph (1). 

[Section 10301 added a new subsection (f) at the end. There are 
no subsections (c)-(e)~\ 

(f) Ambulatory Surgical Centers. — [As added by section 
10301(a)] 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3007 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



288 



(1) In general. — The Secretary shall develop a plan to im- 
plement a value-based purchasing program for payments under 
the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security 
Act for ambulatory surgical centers (as described in section 
1833(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 13951(i))). 

(2) Details. — In developing the plan under paragraph (1), 
the Secretary shall consider the following issues: 

(A) The ongoing development, selection, and modifica- 
tion process for measures (including under section 1890 of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395aaa) and section 
1890A of such Act, as added by section 3014), to the extent 
feasible and practicable, of all dimensions of quality and 
efficiency in ambulatory surgical centers. 

(B) The reporting, collection, and validation of quality 
data. 

(C) The structure of value-based payment adjust- 
ments, including the determination of thresholds or im- 
provements in quality that would substantiate a payment 
adjustment, the size of such payments, and the sources of 
funding for the value-based bonus payments. 

(D) Methods for the public disclosure of information on 
the performance of ambulatory surgical centers. 

(E) Any other issues determined appropriate by the 
Secretary. 

(3) Consultation. — In developing the plan under para- 
graph (1), the Secretary shall — 

(A) consult with relevant affected parties; and 

(B) consider experience with such demonstrations that 
the Secretary determines are relevant to the value-based 
purchasing program described in paragraph (1). 

(4) Report to congress. — Not later than January 1, 2011, 
the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report containing the 
plan developed under paragraph (1). 

SEC. 3007. VALUE-BASED PAYMENT MODIFIER UNDER THE PHYSICIAN 
FEE SCHEDULE. 

Section 1848 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4) is 
amended — 

(1) in subsection (b)(1), by inserting "subject to subsection 
(p)," after "1998,"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: 
"(p) Establishment of Value-based Payment Modifier. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall establish a payment 
modifier that provides for differential payment to a physician 
or a group of physicians under the fee schedule established 
under subsection (b) based upon the quality of care furnished 
compared to cost (as determined under paragraphs (2) and (3), 
respectively) during a performance period. Such payment modi- 
fier shall be separate from the geographic adjustment factors 
established under subsection (e). 
"(2) Quality.— 

"(A) In general. — For purposes of paragraph (1), 
quality of care shall be evaluated, to the extent prac- 
ticable, based on a composite of measures of the quality of 

June 9, 2010 



289 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3007 



care furnished (as established by the Secretary under sub- 
paragraph (B)). 

"(B) Measures. — 

"(i) The Secretary shall establish appropriate 
measures of the quality of care furnished by a physi- 
cian or group of physicians to individuals enrolled 
under this part, such as measures that reflect health 
outcomes. Such measures shall be risk adjusted as de- 
termined appropriate by the Secretary. 

"(ii) The Secretary shall seek endorsement of the 
measures established under this subparagraph by the 
entity with a contract under section 1890(a). 
"(3) Costs. — For purposes of paragraph (1), costs shall be 
evaluated, to the extent practicable, based on a composite of 
appropriate measures of costs established by the Secretary 
(such as the composite measure under the methodology estab- 
lished under subsection (n)(9)(C)(iii)) that eliminate the effect 
of geographic adjustments in payment rates (as described in 
subsection (e)), and take into account risk factors (such as so- 
cioeconomic and demographic characteristics, ethnicity, and 
health status of individuals (such as to recognize that less 
healthy individuals may require more intensive interventions) 
and other factors determined appropriate by the Secretary. 
"(4) Implementation. — 

"(A) Publication of measures, dates of implemen- 
tation, performance period. — Not later than January 1, 
2012, the Secretary shall publish the following: 

"(i) The measures of quality of care and costs es- 
tablished under paragraphs (2) and (3), respectively. 

"(ii) The dates for implementation of the payment 
modifier (as determined under subparagraph (B)). 

"(hi) The initial performance period (as specified 
under subparagraph (B)(ii)). 
"(B) Deadlines for implementation. — 

"(i) Initial implementation. — Subject to the pre- 
ceding provisions of this subparagraph, the Secretary 
shall begin implementing the payment modifier estab- 
lished under this subsection through the rulemaking 
process during 2013 for the physician fee schedule es- 
tablished under subsection (b). 

"(ii) Initial performance period. — 

"(I) In general. — The Secretary shall specify 
an initial performance period for application of the 
payment modifier established under this sub- 
section with respect to 2015. 

"(II) Provision of information during ini- 
tial performance period. — During the initial 
performance period, the Secretary shall, to the ex- 
tent practicable, provide information to physicians 
and groups of physicians about the quality of care 
furnished by the physician or group of physicians 
to individuals enrolled under this part compared 
to cost (as determined under paragraphs (2) and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3007 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



290 



(3), respectively) with respect to the performance 
period. 

"(iii) Application. — The Secretary shall apply the 
payment modifier established under this subsection for 
items and services furnished — 

"(I) beginning on January 1, 2015, with re- 
spect to specific physicians and groups of physi- 
cians the Secretary determines appropriate; and 

"(II) beginning not later than January 1, 
2017, with respect to all physicians and groups of 
physicians. 

"(C) Budget neutrality. — The payment modifier es- 
tablished under this subsection shall be implemented in a 
budget neutral manner. 

"(5) Systems-based care. — The Secretary shall, as appro- 
priate, apply the payment modifier established under this sub- 
section in a manner that promotes systems-based care. 

"(6) Consideration of special circumstances of cer- 
tain PROVIDERS. — In applying the payment modifier under this 
subsection, the Secretary shall, as appropriate, take into ac- 
count the special circumstances of physicians or groups of phy- 
sicians in rural areas and other underserved communities. 

"(7) Application. — For purposes of the initial application 
of the payment modifier established under this subsection dur- 
ing the period beginning on January 1, 2015, and ending on 
December 31, 2016, the term 'physician' has the meaning given 
such term in section 1861(r). On or after January 1, 2017, the 
Secretary may apply this subsection to eligible professionals 
(as denned in subsection (k)(3)(B)) as the Secretary determines 
appropriate. 

"(8) Definitions. — For purposes of this subsection: 

"(A) Costs. — The term 'costs' means expenditures per 
individual as determined appropriate by the Secretary. In 
making the determination under the preceding sentence, 
the Secretary may take into account the amount of growth 
in expenditures per individual for a physician compared to 
the amount of such growth for other physicians. 

"(B) Performance period. — The term 'performance 
period' means a period specified by the Secretary. 
"(9) Coordination with other value-based purchasing 
reforms. — The Secretary shall coordinate the value-based pay- 
ment modifier established under this subsection with the Phy- 
sician Feedback Program under subsection (n) and, as the Sec- 
retary determines appropriate, other similar provisions of this 
title. 

"(10) Limitations on review. — There shall be no adminis- 
trative or judicial review under section 1869, section 1878, or 
otherwise of — 

"(A) the establishment of the value-based payment 
modifier under this subsection; 

"(B) the evaluation of quality of care under paragraph 
(2), including the establishment of appropriate measures of 
the quality of care under paragraph (2)(B); 

June 9, 2010 



291 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3008 



"(C) the evaluation of costs under paragraph (3), in- 
cluding the establishment of appropriate measures of costs 
under such paragraph; 

"(D) the dates for implementation of the value-based 
payment modifier; 

"(E) the specification of the initial performance period 
and any other performance period under paragraphs 
(4)(B)(ii) and (8)(B), respectively; 

"(F) the application of the value-based payment modi- 
fier under paragraph (7); and 

"(G) the determination of costs under paragraph 
(8)(A).". 

SEC. 3008. PAYMENT ADJUSTMENT FOR CONDITIONS ACQUIRED IN 
HOSPITALS. 

(a) In General. — Section 1886 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395ww), as amended by section 3001, is amended by add- 
ing at the end the following new subsection: 

"(p) Adjustment to Hospital Payments for Hospital Ac- 
quired Conditions. — 

"(1) In general. — In order to provide an incentive for ap- 
plicable hospitals to reduce hospital acquired conditions under 
this title, with respect to discharges from an applicable hos- 
pital occurring during fiscal year 2015 or a subsequent fiscal 
year, the amount of payment under this section or section 
1814(b)(3), as applicable, for such discharges during the fiscal 
year shall be equal to 99 percent of the amount of payment 
that would otherwise apply to such discharges under this sec- 
tion or section 1814(b)(3) (determined after the application of 
subsections (o) and (q) and section 1814(1)(4) but without re- 
gard to this subsection). 

"(2) Applicable hospitals. — 

"(A) In general. — For purposes of this subsection, the 
term 'applicable hospital' means a subsection (d) hospital 
that meets the criteria described in subparagraph (B). 
"(B) Criteria described. — 

"(i) In general. — The criteria described in this 
subparagraph, with respect to a subsection (d) hos- 
pital, is that the subsection (d) hospital is in the top 
quartile of all subsection (d) hospitals, relative to the 
national average, of hospital acquired conditions dur- 
ing the applicable period, as determined by the Sec- 
retary. 

"(ii) Risk adjustment. — In carrying out clause (i), 
the Secretary shall establish and apply an appropriate 
risk adjustment methodology. 

"(C) Exemption. — In the case of a hospital that is paid 
under section 1814(b)(3), the Secretary may exempt such 
hospital from the application of this subsection if the State 
which is paid under such section submits an annual report 
to the Secretary describing how a similar program in the 
State for a participating hospital or hospitals achieves or 
surpasses the measured results in terms of patient health 
outcomes and cost savings established under this sub- 
section. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3008 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



292 



"(3) Hospital acquired conditions. — For purposes of this 
subsection, the term 'hospital acquired condition' means a con- 
dition identified for purposes of subsection (d)(4)(D)(iv) and any 
other condition determined appropriate by the Secretary that 
an individual acquires during a stay in an applicable hospital, 
as determined by the Secretary. 

"(4) Applicable period. — In this subsection, the term 'ap- 
plicable period' means, with respect to a fiscal year, a period 
specified by the Secretary. 

"(5) Reporting to hospitals. — Prior to fiscal year 2015 
and each subsequent fiscal year, the Secretary shall provide 
confidential reports to applicable hospitals with respect to hos- 
pital acquired conditions of the applicable hospital during the 
applicable period. 

"(6) Reporting hospital specific information. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall make informa- 
tion available to the public regarding hospital acquired 
conditions of each applicable hospital. 

"(B) Opportunity to review and submit correc- 
tions. — The Secretary shall ensure that an applicable hos- 
pital has the opportunity to review, and submit corrections 
for, the information to be made public with respect to the 
hospital under subparagraph (A) prior to such information 
being made public. 

"(C) Website. — Such information shall be posted on 
the Hospital Compare Internet website in an easily under- 
standable format. 

"(7) Limitations on review. — There shall be no adminis- 
trative or judicial review under section 1869, section 1878, or 
otherwise of the following: 

"(A) The criteria described in paragraph (2)(A). 

"(B) The specification of hospital acquired conditions 

under paragraph (3). 

"(C) The specification of the applicable period under 

paragraph (4). 

"(D) The provision of reports to applicable hospitals 

under paragraph (5) and the information made available to 

the public under paragraph (6).". 
(b) Study and Report on Expansion of Healthcare Ac- 
quired Conditions Policy to Other Providers. — 

(1) Study. — The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
shall conduct a study on expanding the healthcare acquired 
conditions policy under subsection (d)(4)(D) of section 1886 of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww) to payments made 
to other facilities under the Medicare program under title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act, including such payments 
made to inpatient rehabilitation facilities, long-term care hos- 
pitals (as described in subsection(d)(l)(B)(iv) of such section), 
hospital outpatient departments, and other hospitals excluded 
from the inpatient prospective payment system under such sec- 
tion, skilled nursing facilities, ambulatory surgical centers, and 
health clinics. Such study shall include an analysis of how such 
policies could impact quality of patient care, patient safety, 
and spending under the Medicare program. 

June 9, 2010 



293 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 3011\399HH PHSA 



(2) Report. — Not later than January 1, 2012, the Sec- 
retary shall submit to Congress a report containing the results 
of the study conducted under paragraph (1), together with rec- 
ommendations for such legislation and administrative action as 
the Secretary determines appropriate. 

PART 2— NATIONAL STRATEGY TO IMPROVE 
HEALTH CARE QUALITY 

SEC. 3011. NATIONAL STRATEGY. 

Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 241 et 
seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"PART S— HEALTH CARE QUALITY PROGRAMS 

"Subpart I — National Strategy for Quality 
Improvement in Health Care 

"SEC. 399HH [42 U.S.C. 280j]. NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR QUALITY IM- 
PROVEMENT IN HEALTH CARE. 

"(a) Establishment of National Strategy and Priorities. — 
"(1) National strategy. — The Secretary, through a trans- 
parent collaborative process, shall establish a national strategy 
to improve the delivery of health care services, patient health 
outcomes, and population health. 

"(2) Identification of priorities. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall identify na- 
tional priorities for improvement in developing the strat- 
egy under paragraph (1). 

"(B) Requirements. — The Secretary shall ensure that 
priorities identified under subparagraph (A) will — 

"(i) have the greatest potential for improving the 
health outcomes, efficiency, and patient-centeredness 
of health care for all populations, including children 
and vulnerable populations; 

"(ii) identify areas in the delivery of health care 
services that have the potential for rapid improvement 
in the quality and efficiency of patient care; 

"(hi) address gaps in quality, efficiency, compara- 
tive effectiveness information (taking into consider- 
ation the limitations set forth in subsections (c) and 
(d) of section 1182 of the Social Security Act), and 
health outcomes measures and data aggregation tech- 
niques; [As revised by section 10302] 

"(iv) improve Federal payment policy to emphasize 
quality and efficiency; 

"(v) enhance the use of health care data to im- 
prove quality, efficiency, transparency, and outcomes; 

"(vi) address the health care provided to patients 
with high-cost chronic diseases; 

"(vii) improve research and dissemination of strat- 
egies and best practices to improve patient safety and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 301 1X399HH PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



294 



reduce medical errors, preventable admissions and re- 
admissions, and health care-associated infections; 

"(viii) reduce health disparities across health dis- 
parity populations (as defined in section 485E) and ge- 
ographic areas; and 

"(ix) address other areas as determined appro- 
priate by the Secretary. 

"(C) Considerations. — In identifying priorities under 
subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall take into consider- 
ation the recommendations submitted by the entity with a 
contract under section 1890(a) of the Social Security Act 
and other stakeholders. 

"(D) Coordination with state agencies. — The Sec- 
retary shall collaborate, coordinate, and consult with State 
agencies responsible for administering the Medicaid pro- 
gram under title XIX of the Social Security Act and the 
Children's Health Insurance Program under title XXI of 
such Act with respect to developing and disseminating 
strategies, goals, models, and timetables that are con- 
sistent with the national priorities identified under sub- 
paragraph (A). 
"(b) Strategic Plan. — 

"(1) In general. — The national strategy shall include a 
comprehensive strategic plan to achieve the priorities described 
in subsection (a). 

"(2) Requirements. — The strategic plan shall include pro- 
visions for addressing, at a minimum, the following: 

"(A) Coordination among agencies within the Depart- 
ment, which shall include steps to minimize duplication of 
efforts and utilization of common quality measures, where 
available. Such common quality measures shall be meas- 
ures identified by the Secretary under section 1139A or 
1139B of the Social Security Act or endorsed under section 
1890 of such Act. 

"(B) Agency-specific strategic plans to achieve national 
priorities. 

"(C) Establishment of annual benchmarks for each rel- 
evant agency to achieve national priorities. 

"(D) A process for regular reporting by the agencies to 
the Secretary on the implementation of the strategic plan. 

"(E) Strategies to align public and private payers with 
regard to quality and patient safety efforts. 

"(F) Incorporating quality improvement and measure- 
ment in the strategic plan for health information tech- 
nology required by the American Recovery and Reinvest- 
ment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). 
"(c) Periodic Update of National Strategy. — The Secretary 
shall update the national strategy not less than annually. Any such 
update shall include a review of short- and long-term goals. 

"(d) Submission and Availability of National Strategy and 
Updates. — 

"(1) Deadline for initial submission of national strat- 
egy. — Not later than January 1, 2011, the Secretary shall sub- 
June 9, 2010 



295 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3012 



mit to the relevant committees of Congress the national strat- 
egy described in subsection (a). 
"(2) Updates. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall submit to the 
relevant committees of Congress an annual update to the 
strategy described in paragraph (1). 

"(B) Information submitted. — Each update sub- 
mitted under subparagraph (A) shall include — 

"(i) a review of the short- and long-term goals of 
the national strategy and any gaps in such strategy; 

"(ii) an analysis of the progress, or lack of 
progress, in meeting such goals and any barriers to 
such progress; 

"(hi) the information reported under section 1139A 
of the Social Security Act, consistent with the report- 
ing requirements of such section; and 

"(iv) in the case of an update required to be sub- 
mitted on or after January 1, 2014, the information re- 
ported under section 1139B(b)(4) of the Social Security 
Act, consistent with the reporting requirements of 
such section. 

"(C) Satisfaction of other reporting require- 
ments. — Compliance with the requirements of clauses (iii) 
and (iv) of subparagraph (B) shall satisfy the reporting re- 
quirements under sections 1139A(a)(6) and 1139B(b)(4), re- 
spectively, of the Social Security Act. 
"(e) Health Care Quality Internet Website. — Not later 
than January 1, 2011, the Secretary shall create an Internet 
website to make public information regarding — 

"(1) the national priorities for health care quality improve- 
ment established under subsection (a)(2); 

"(2) the agency-specific strategic plans for health care 
quality described in subsection (b)(2)(B); and 

"(3) other information, as the Secretary determines to be 
appropriate.". 

SEC. 3012 [42 U.S.C. 280j note]. INTERAGENCY WORKING GROUP ON 
HEALTH CARE QUALITY. 

(a) In General. — The President shall convene a working group 
to be known as the Interagency Working Group on Health Care 
Quality (referred to in this section as the "Working Group"). 

(b) Goals. — The goals of the Working Group shall be to 
achieve the following: 

(1) Collaboration, cooperation, and consultation between 
Federal departments and agencies with respect to developing 
and disseminating strategies, goals, models, and timetables 
that are consistent with the national priorities identified under 
section 399HH(a)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (as added 
by section 3011). 

(2) Avoidance of inefficient duplication of quality improve- 
ment efforts and resources, where practicable, and a stream- 
lined process for quality reporting and compliance require- 
ments. 

(3) Assess alignment of quality efforts in the public sector 
with private sector initiatives. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3013 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



296 



(c) Composition. — 

(1) In general. — The Working Group shall be composed of 
senior level representatives of — 

(A) the Department of Health and Human Services; 

(B) the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services; 

(C) the National Institutes of Health; 

(D) the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 

(E) the Food and Drug Administration; 

(F) the Health Resources and Services Administration; 

(G) the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 

(H) the Office of the National Coordinator for Health 
Information Technology; 

(I) the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration; 

(J) the Administration for Children and Families; 
(K) the Department of Commerce; 
(L) the Office of Management and Budget; 
(M) the United States Coast Guard; 
(N) the Federal Bureau of Prisons; 
(0) the National Highway Traffic Safety Administra- 
tion; 

(P) the Federal Trade Commission; 
(Q) the Social Security Administration; 
(R) the Department of Labor; 

(S) the United States Office of Personnel Management; 

(T) the Department of Defense; 

(U) the Department of Education; 

(V) the Department of Veterans Affairs; 

(W) the Veterans Health Administration; and 

(X) any other Federal agencies and departments with 
activities relating to improving health care quality and 
safety, as determined by the President. 

(2) Chair and vice-chair. — 

(A) Chair. — The Working Group shall be chaired by 
the Secretary of Health and Human Services. 

(B) Vice chair. — Members of the Working Group, 
other than the Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
shall serve as Vice Chair of the Group on a rotating basis, 
as determined by the Group. 

(d) Report to Congress. — Not later than December 31, 2010, 
and annually thereafter, the Working Group shall submit to the 
relevant Committees of Congress, and make public on an Internet 
website, a report describing the progress and recommendations of 
the Working Group in meeting the goals described in subsection 
(b). 

SEC. 3013. QUALITY MEASURE DEVELOPMENT. 

(a) Public Health Service Act. — Title IX of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299 et seq.) is amended — 

(1) by redesignating part D as part E; 

(2) by redesignating sections 931 through 938 as sections 
941 through 948, respectively; 

(3) in section 948(1), as so redesignated, by striking "931" 
and inserting "941"; and 

June 9, 2010 



297 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3013\931 PHSA 



(4) by inserting after section 926 the following: 

"PART D— HEALTH CARE QUALITY 
IMPROVEMENT 

"Subpart I — Quality Measure Development 

"SEC. 931 [42 U.S.C. 299b-31]. QUALITY MEASURE DEVELOPMENT. 

"(a) Quality Measure. — In this subpart, the term 'quality 
measure' means a standard for measuring the performance and im- 
provement of population health or of health plans, providers of 
services, and other clinicians in the delivery of health care services. 
"(b) Identification of Quality Measures. — 

"(1) Identification. — The Secretary, in consultation with 
the Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Qual- 
ity and the Administrator of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Med- 
icaid Services, shall identify, not less often than triennially, 
gaps where no quality measures exist and existing quality 
measures that need improvement, updating, or expansion, con- 
sistent with the national strategy under section 399HH, to the 
extent available, for use in Federal health programs. In identi- 
fying such gaps and existing quality measures that need im- 
provement, the Secretary shall take into consideration — 

"(A) the gaps identified by the entity with a contract 
under section 1890(a) of the Social Security Act and other 
stakeholders; 

"(B) quality measures identified by the pediatric qual- 
ity measures program under section 1139A of the Social 
Security Act; and 

"(C) quality measures identified through the Medicaid 
Quality Measurement Program under section 1139B of the 
Social Security Act. 

"(2) Publication. — The Secretary shall make available to 
the public on an Internet website a report on any gaps identi- 
fied under paragraph (1) and the process used to make such 
identification. 

"(c) Grants or Contracts for Quality Measure Develop- 
ment. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall award grants, con- 
tracts, or intergovernmental agreements to eligible entities for 
purposes of developing, improving, updating, or expanding 
quality measures identified under subsection (b). 

"(2) Prioritization in the development of quality 
measures. — In awarding grants, contracts, or agreements 
under this subsection, the Secretary shall give priority to the 
development of quality measures that allow the assessment 
of— 

"(A) health outcomes and functional status of patients; 

"(B) the management and coordination of health care 
across episodes of care and care transitions for patients 
across the continuum of providers, health care settings, 
and health plans; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3013N931 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



298 



"(C) the experience, quality, and use of information 
provided to and used by patients, caregivers, and author- 
ized representatives to inform decisionmaking about treat- 
ment options, including the use of shared decisionmaking 
tools and preference sensitive care (as defined in section 
936); 

"(D) the meaningful use of health information tech- 
nology; 

"(E) the safety, effectiveness, patient-centeredness, ap- 
propriateness, and timeliness of care; 
"(F) the efficiency of care; 

"(G) the equity of health services and health dispari- 
ties across health disparity populations (as denned in sec- 
tion 485E) and geographic areas; 

"(H) patient experience and satisfaction; 

"(I) the use of innovative strategies and methodologies 
identified under section 933; and 

"(J) other areas determined appropriate by the Sec- 
retary. 

"(3) Eligible entities. — To be eligible for a grant or con- 
tract under this subsection, an entity shall — 

"(A) have demonstrated expertise and capacity in the 
development and evaluation of quality measures; 

"(B) have adopted procedures to include in the quality 
measure development process — 

"(i) the views of those providers or payers whose 
performance will be assessed by the measure; and 

"(ii) the views of other parties who also will use 
the quality measures (such as patients, consumers, 
and health care purchasers); 

"(C) collaborate with the entity with a contract under 
section 1890(a) of the Social Security Act and other stake- 
holders, as practicable, and the Secretary so that quality 
measures developed by the eligible entity will meet the re- 
quirements to be considered for endorsement by the entity 
with a contract under such section 1890(a); 

"(D) have transparent policies regarding governance 
and conflicts of interest; and 

"(E) submit an application to the Secretary at such 
time and in such manner, as the Secretary may require. 
"(4) Use of funds. — An entity that receives a grant, con- 
tract, or agreement under this subsection shall use such award 
to develop quality measures that meet the following require- 
ments: 

"(A) Such measures support measures required to be 
reported under the Social Security Act, where applicable, 
and in support of gaps and existing quality measures that 
need improvement, as described in subsection (b)(1)(A). 

"(B) Such measures support measures developed under 
section 1139A of the Social Security Act and the Medicaid 
Quality Measurement Program under section 1139B of 
such Act, where applicable. 

June 9, 2010 



299 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3013 



"(C) To the extent practicable, data on such quality 
measures is able to be collected using health information 
technologies. 

"(D) Each quality measure is free of charge to users of 
such measure. 

"(E) Each quality measure is publicly available on an 
Internet website. 
"(d) Other Activities by the Secretary. — The Secretary may 
use amounts available under this section to update and test, where 
applicable, quality measures endorsed by the entity with a contract 
under section 1890(a) of the Social Security Act or adopted by the 
Secretary. 

"(e) Coordination of Grants. — The Secretary shall ensure 
that grants or contracts awarded under this section are coordinated 
with grants and contracts awarded under sections 1139A(5) and 
1139B(4)(A) of the Social Security Act. 

"(f) Development of Outcome Measures. — [As added by sec- 
tion 10303(a)] 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall develop, and peri- 
odically update (not less than every 3 years), provider-level 
outcome measures for hospitals and physicians, as well as 
other providers as determined appropriate by the Secretary. 

"(2) Categories of measures. — The measures developed 
under this subsection shall include, to the extent determined 
appropriate by the Secretary — 

"(A) outcome measurement for acute and chronic dis- 
eases, including, to the extent feasible, the 5 most preva- 
lent and resource-intensive acute and chronic medical con- 
ditions; and 

"(B) outcome measurement for primary and preventa- 
tive care, including, to the extent feasible, measurements 
that cover provision of such care for distinct patient popu- 
lations (such as healthy children, chronically ill adults, or 
infirm elderly individuals). 

"(3) Goals. — In developing such measures, the Secretary 
shall seek to — 

"(A) address issues regarding risk adjustment, ac- 
countability, and sample size; 

"(B) include the full scope of services that comprise a 
cycle of care; and 

"(C) include multiple dimensions. 
"(4) Timeframe. — 

"(A) Acute and chronic diseases. — Not later than 24 
months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Sec- 
retary shall develop not less than 10 measures described 
in paragraph (2)(A). 

"(B) Primary and preventive care. — Not later than 
36 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Sec- 
retary shall develop not less than 10 measures described 
in paragraph (2)(B).". 
(b) Social Security Act. — Section 1890A of the Social Secu- 
rity Act, as added by section 3014(b), is amended by adding at the 
end the following new subsection: [Note: amendment made by sec- 
tion 10304 strikes "quality" and inserts "quality and efficiency" in 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3014 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



300 



section 1890A of the Social Security Act but did not specifically 
amend headings below (which have different typeface)~\ 

"(e) Development of Quality [And Efficiency] Measures. — 
The Administrator of the Center for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services 
shall through contracts develop quality and efficiency measures (as 
determined appropriate by the Administrator) for use under this 
Act. In developing such measures, the Administrator shall consult 
with the Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Qual- 
ity. 

[A subsection (f) was also added by section 10303 as shown 
below :] 

"(f) Hospital Acquired Conditions. — The Secretary shall, to 
the extent practicable, publicly report on measures for hospital-ac- 
quired conditions that are currently utilized by the Centers for 
Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services for the adjustment of the amount of 
payment to hospitals based on rates of hospital-acquired infec- 
tions.". 

(c) Funding. — There are authorized to be appropriated to the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services to carry out this section, 
$75,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014. Of the 
amounts appropriated under the preceding sentence in a fiscal 
year, not less than 50 percent of such amounts shall be used pursu- 
ant to subsection (e) of section 1890A of the Social Security Act, as 
added by subsection (b), with respect to programs under such Act. 
Amounts appropriated under this subsection for a fiscal year shall 
remain available until expended. 

SEC. 3014. QUALITY MEASUREMENT. 

(a) New Duties for Consensus-based Entity. — 

(1) Multi-stakeholder group input. — Section 1890(b) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395aaa(b)), as amended by 
section 3003, is amended by adding at the end the following 
new paragraphs: [amendment by section 10304 strikes "qual- 
ity" and inserts "quality and efficiency" in new paragraph (7) 
but did not specifically amend heading of paragraph (7)(B) 
below (which has different typeface).] 

"(7) Convening multi-stakeholder groups. — 

"(A) In general. — The entity shall convene multi- 
stakeholder groups to provide input on — 

"(i) the selection of quality and efficiency meas- 
ures described in subparagraph (B), from among — 

"(I) such measures that have been endorsed 
by the entity; and 

"(II) such measures that have not been con- 
sidered for endorsement by such entity but are 
used or proposed to be used by the Secretary for 
the collection or reporting of quality and efficiency 
measures; and 

"(ii) national priorities (as identified under section 
399HH of the Public Health Service Act) for improve- 
ment in population health and in the delivery of 
health care services for consideration under the na- 
tional strategy established under section 399HH of the 
Public Health Service Act. 



301 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3014 



"(B) Quality [and efficiency] measures. — 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), the quality 
and efficiency measures described in this subpara- 
graph are quality and efficiency measures — 

"(I) for use pursuant to sections 1814(i)(5)(D), 
1833GX7), 1833(t)(17), 1848(k)(2)(C), 1866(k)(3), 
1881(h)(2)(A)(iii), 1886(b)(3)(B)(viii), 1886(j)(7)(D), 
1886(m)(5)(D), 1886(o)(2), 1886(s)(4)(D), and 
1895(bX3)(B)(v); [As revised by section 10322(b)] 

"(II) for use in reporting performance informa- 
tion to the public; and 

"(III) for use in health care programs other 
than for use under this Act. 

"(ii) Exclusion. — Data sets (such as the outcome 
and assessment information set for home health serv- 
ices and the minimum data set for skilled nursing fa- 
cility services) that are used for purposes of classifica- 
tion systems used in establishing payment rates under 
this title shall not be quality and efficiency measures 
described in this subparagraph. 
"(C) Requirement for transparency in process. — 

"(i) In general. — In convening multi-stakeholder 
groups under subparagraph (A) with respect to the se- 
lection of quality and efficiency measures, the entity 
shall provide for an open and transparent process for 
the activities conducted pursuant to such convening. 

"(ii) Selection of organizations participating 
in multi-stakeholder groups. — The process de- 
scribed in clause (i) shall ensure that the selection of 
representatives comprising such groups provides for 
public nominations for, and the opportunity for public 
comment on, such selection. 

"(D) Multi-stakeholder group defined. — In this 
paragraph, the term 'multi-stakeholder group' means, with 
respect to a quality and efficiency measure, a voluntary 
collaborative of organizations representing a broad group 
of stakeholders interested in or affected by the use of such 
quality and efficiency measure. 

"(8) Transmission of multi-stakeholder input. — Not 
later than February 1 of each year (beginning with 2012), the 
entity shall transmit to the Secretary the input of multi-stake- 
holder groups provided under paragraph (7).". 

(2) Annual report. — Section 1890(b)(5)(A) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395aaa(b)(5)(A)) is amended— 

(A) in clause (ii), by striking "and" at the end; 

(B) in clause (iii), by striking the period at the end and 
inserting a semicolon; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following new clauses: 
"(iv) gaps in endorsed quality measures, which 

shall include measures that are within priority areas 
identified by the Secretary under the national strategy 
established under section 399HH of the Public Health 
Service Act, and where quality measures are unavail- 
able or inadequate to identify or address such gaps; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3014U890A SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



302 



"(v) areas in which evidence is insufficient to sup- 
port endorsement of quality measures in priority areas 
identified by the Secretary under the national strategy 
established under section 399HH of the Public Health 
Service Act and where targeted research may address 
such gaps; and 

"(vi) the matters described in clauses (i) and (ii) of 
paragraph (7)(A).". 
(b) Multi-stakeholder Group Input Into Selection of 
Quality Measures. — Title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 1890 the 
following: [amendment by section 10304 strikes "quality" and in- 
serts "quality and efficiency" in new section but did not specifically 
amend headings below (which have different typefaces).] 

"QUALITY [AND EFFICIENCY] MEASUREMENT 

"Sec. 1890A [42 U.S.C. 1395aaa-l]. (a) Multi-stakeholder 
Group Input Into Selection of Quality [And Efficiency] 
Measures. — The Secretary shall establish a pre-rulemaking proc- 
ess under which the following steps occur with respect to the selec- 
tion of quality and efficiency measures described in section 
1890(b)(7)(B): 

"(1) Input. — Pursuant to section 1890(b)(7), the entity with 
a contract under section 1890 shall convene multi-stakeholder 
groups to provide input to the Secretary on the selection of 
quality and efficiency measures described in subparagraph (B) 
of such paragraph. 

"(2) Public availability of measures considered for 
selection. — Not later than December 1 of each year (begin- 
ning with 2011), the Secretary shall make available to the pub- 
lic a list of quality and efficiency measures described in section 
1890(b)(7)(B) that the Secretary is considering under this title. 

"(3) Transmission of multi-stakeholder input. — Pursu- 
ant to section 1890(b)(8), not later than February 1 of each 
year (beginning with 2012), the entity shall transmit to the 
Secretary the input of multi-stakeholder groups described in 
paragraph (1). 

"(4) Consideration of multi-stakeholder input. — The 
Secretary shall take into consideration the input from multi- 
stakeholder groups described in paragraph (1) in selecting 
quality and efficiency measures described in section 
1890(b)(7)(B) that have been endorsed by the entity with a con- 
tract under section 1890 and measures that have not been en- 
dorsed by such entity. 

"(5) Rationale for use of quality [and efficiency] 
measures. — The Secretary shall publish in the Federal Reg- 
ister the rationale for the use of any quality and efficiency 
measure described in section 1890(b)(7)(B) that has not been 
endorsed by the entity with a contract under section 1890. 

"(6) Assessment of impact. — Not later than March 1, 
2012, and at least once every three years thereafter, the Sec- 
retary shall — 

June 9, 2010 



303 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3014U890A SSA 



"(A) conduct an assessment of the quality and effi- 
ciency impact of the use of endorsed measures described in 
section 1890(b)(7)(B); and 

"(B) make such assessment available to the public. 
"(b) Process for Dissemination of Measures Used by the 
Secretary. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall establish a process 
for disseminating quality and efficiency measures used by the 
Secretary. Such process shall include the following: 

"(A) The incorporation of such measures, where appli- 
cable, in workforce programs, training curricula, and any 
other means of dissemination determined appropriate by 
the Secretary. 

"(B) The dissemination of such quality and efficiency 
measures through the national strategy developed under 
section 399HH of the Public Health Service Act. 
"(2) Existing methods. — To the extent practicable, the 
Secretary shall utilize and expand existing dissemination 
methods in disseminating quality and efficiency measures 
under the process established under paragraph (1). 
"(c) Review of Quality [And Efficiency] Measures Used by 
the Secretary. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall — 

"(A) periodically (but in no case less often than once 
every 3 years) review quality and efficiency measures de- 
scribed in section 1890(b)(7)(B); and 

"(B) with respect to each such measure, determine 
whether to — 

"(i) maintain the use of such measure; or 
"(ii) phase out such measure. 
"(2) Considerations. — In conducting the review under 
paragraph (1), the Secretary shall take steps to — 

"(A) seek to avoid duplication of measures used; and 
"(B) take into consideration current innovative meth- 
odologies and strategies for quality and efficiency improve- 
ment practices in the delivery of health care services that 
represent best practices for such quality and efficiency im- 
provement and measures endorsed by the entity with a 
contract under section 1890 since the previous review by 
the Secretary. 

"(d) Rule of Construction. — Nothing in this section shall 
preclude a State from using the quality and efficiency measures 
identified under sections 1139A and 1139B. 

[Note: A subsection (e) was also added by section 3013(b) and 
a subsection (f) was also added by section 10303(b) of HCERA] 

(c) Funding. — For purposes of carrying out the amendments 
made by this section, the Secretary shall provide for the transfer, 
from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under section 
1817 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i) and the Federal 
Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund under section 1841 
of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395t), in such proportion as the Secretary 
determines appropriate, of $20,000,000, to the Centers for Medicare 
&amp; Medicaid Services Program Management Account for each of fis- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3015 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



304 



cal years 2010 through 2014. Amounts transferred under the pre- 
ceding sentence shall remain available until expended. 

SEC. 3015. DATA COLLECTION; PUBLIC REPORTING. 

Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 241 et 
seq.), as amended by section 3011, is further amended by adding 
at the end the following: 

"SEC. 399II [42 U.S.C. 280-1]. COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS OF DATA FOR 
QUALITY AND RESOURCE USE MEASURES. 

"(a) In General. — [Replaced by section 10305] 

"(1) Establishment of strategic framework. — The Sec- 
retary shall establish and implement an overall strategic 
framework to carry out the public reporting of performance in- 
formation, as described in section 399JJ. Such strategic frame- 
work may include methods and related timelines for imple- 
menting nationally consistent data collection, data aggregation, 
and analysis methods. 

"(2) Collection and aggregation of data. — The Sec- 
retary shall collect and aggregate consistent data on quality 
and resource use measures from information systems used to 
support health care delivery, and may award grants or con- 
tracts for this purpose. The Secretary shall align such collec- 
tion and aggregation efforts with the requirements and assist- 
ance regarding the expansion of health information technology 
systems, the interoperability of such technology systems, and 
related standards that are in effect on the date of enactment 
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 

"(3) Scope. — The Secretary shall ensure that the data col- 
lection, data aggregation, and analysis systems described in 
paragraph (1) involve an increasingly broad range of patient 
populations, providers, and geographic areas over time. 
"(b) Grants or Contracts for Data Collection. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary may award grants or con- 
tracts to eligible entities to support new, or improve existing, 
efforts to collect and aggregate quality and resource use meas- 
ures described under subsection (c). 

"(2) Eligible entities. — To be eligible for a grant or con- 
tract under this subsection, an entity shall — 
"(A) be— 

"(i) a multi-stakeholder entity that coordinates the 
development of methods and implementation plans for 
the consistent reporting of summary quality and cost 
information; 

"(ii) an entity capable of submitting such sum- 
mary data for a particular population and providers, 
such as a disease registry, regional collaboration, 
health plan collaboration, or other population-wide 
source; or 

"(hi) a Federal Indian Health Service program or 
a health program operated by an Indian tribe (as de- 
fined in section 4 of the Indian Health Care Improve- 
ment Act); 

"(B) promote the use of the systems that provide data 
to improve and coordinate patient care; 

June 9, 2010 



305 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 3015N399JJ PHSA 



"(C) support the provision of timely, consistent quality 
and resource use information to health care providers, and 
other groups and organizations as appropriate, with an op- 
portunity for providers to correct inaccurate measures; and 
"(D) agree to report, as determined by the Secretary, 
measures on quality and resource use to the public in ac- 
cordance with the public reporting process established 
under section 399JJ. 
"(c) Consistent Data Aggregation. — The Secretary may 
award grants or contracts under this section only to entities that 
enable summary data that can be integrated and compared across 
multiple sources. The Secretary shall provide standards for the pro- 
tection of the security and privacy of patient data. 

"(d) Matching Funds. — The Secretary may not award a grant 
or contract under this section to an entity unless the entity agrees 
that it will make available (directly or through contributions from 
other public or private entities) non-Federal contributions toward 
the activities to be carried out under the grant or contract in an 
amount equal to $1 for each $5 of Federal funds provided under the 
grant or contract. Such non-Federal matching funds may be pro- 
vided directly or through donations from public or private entities 
and may be in cash or in-kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, 
equipment, or services. 

"(e) Authorization of Appropriations. — To carry out this 
section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may 
be necessary for fiscal years 2010 through 2014. 

"SEC. 399JJ [42 U.S.C. 280j-2]. PUBLIC REPORTING OF PERFORMANCE 
INFORMATION. 

"(a) Development of Performance Websites. — The Sec- 
retary shall make available to the public, through standardized 
Internet websites, performance information summarizing data on 
quality measures. Such information shall be tailored to respond to 
the differing needs of hospitals and other institutional health care 
providers, physicians and other clinicians, patients, consumers, re- 
searchers, policymakers, States, and other stakeholders, as the Sec- 
retary may specify. 

"(b) Information on Conditions. — The performance informa- 
tion made publicly available on an Internet website, as described 
in subsection (a), shall include information regarding clinical condi- 
tions to the extent such information is available, and the informa- 
tion shall, where appropriate, be provider-specific and sufficiently 
disaggregated and specific to meet the needs of patients with dif- 
ferent clinical conditions. 
"(c) Consultation. — 

"(1) In general. — In carrying out this section, the Sec- 
retary shall consult with the entity with a contract under sec- 
tion 1890(a) of the Social Security Act, and other entities, as 
appropriate, to determine the type of information that is useful 
to stakeholders and the format that best facilitates use of the 
reports and of performance reporting Internet websites. 

"(2) Consultation with stakeholders. — The entity with 
a contract under section 1890(a) of the Social Security Act 
shall convene multi-stakeholder groups, as described in such 
section, to review the design and format of each Internet 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3021 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



306 



website made available under subsection (a) and shall transmit 
to the Secretary the views of such multi-stakeholder groups 
with respect to each such design and format. 
"(d) Coordination. — Where appropriate, the Secretary shall 
coordinate the manner in which data are presented through Inter- 
net websites described in subsection (a) and for public reporting of 
other quality measures by the Secretary, including such quality 
measures under title XVIII of the Social Security Act. 

"(e) Authorization of Appropriations. — To carry out this 
section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may 
be necessary for fiscal years 2010 through 2014.". 

PART 3— ENCOURAGING DEVELOPMENT OF 
NEW PATIENT CARE MODELS 

SEC. 3021. ESTABLISHMENT OF CENTER FOR MEDICARE AND MED- 
ICAID INNOVATION WITHIN CMS. 

(a) In General. — Title XI of the Social Security Act is amend- 
ed by inserting after section 1115 the following new section: 

"CENTER FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID INNOVATION 

"Sec. 1115A [42 U.S.C. 1315a]. (a) Center for Medicare 
and Medicaid Innovation Established. — 

"(1) In general. — There is created within the Centers for 
Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services a Center for Medicare and Med- 
icaid Innovation (in this section referred to as the 'CMI') to 
carry out the duties described in this section. The purpose of 
the CMI is to test innovative payment and service delivery 
models to reduce program expenditures under the applicable ti- 
tles while preserving or enhancing the quality of care fur- 
nished to individuals under such titles. In selecting such mod- 
els, the Secretary shall give preference to models that also im- 
prove the coordination, quality, and efficiency of health care 
services furnished to applicable individuals denned in para- 
graph (4)(A). 

"(2) Deadline. — The Secretary shall ensure that the CMI 
is carrying out the duties described in this section by not later 
than January 1, 2011. 

"(3) Consultation. — In carrying out the duties under this 
section, the CMI shall consult representatives of relevant Fed- 
eral agencies, and clinical and analytical experts with expertise 
in medicine and health care management. The CMI shall use 
open door forums or other mechanisms to seek input from in- 
terested parties. 

"(4) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(A) Applicable individual. — The term 'applicable in- 
dividual' means — 

"(i) an individual who is entitled to, or enrolled 
for, benefits under part A of title XVIII or enrolled for 
benefits under part B of such title; 

"(ii) an individual who is eligible for medical as- 
sistance under title XIX, under a State plan or waiver; 
or 

June 9, 2010 



307 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3021M115A SSA 



"(iii) an individual who meets the criteria of both 
clauses (i) and (ii). 

"(B) Applicable title. — The term 'applicable title' 
means title XVIII, title XIX, or both. 

"(5) Testing within certain geographic areas. — For 
purposes of testing payment and service delivery models under 
this section, the Secretary may elect to limit testing of a model 
to certain geographic areas. [As added by section 10306(1)~\ 
"(b) Testing of Models (Phase I). — 

"(1) In general. — The CMI shall test payment and service 
delivery models in accordance with selection criteria under 
paragraph (2) to determine the effect of applying such models 
under the applicable title (as defined in subsection (a)(4)(B)) on 
program expenditures under such titles and the quality of care 
received by individuals receiving benefits under such title. 
"(2) Selection of models to be tested. — 

"(A) In general. — [As revised by section 
10306(a)(2)(A)] The Secretary shall select models to be 
tested from models where the Secretary determines that 
there is evidence that the model addresses a defined popu- 
lation for which there are deficits in care leading to poor 
clinical outcomes or potentially avoidable expenditures. 
The Secretary shall focus on models expected to reduce 
program costs under the applicable title while preserving 
or enhancing the quality of care received by individuals re- 
ceiving benefits under such title. The models selected 
under this subparagraph may include, but are not limited 
to, the models described in subparagraph (B). 

"(B) Opportunities. — The models described in this 
subparagraph are the following models: 

"(i) Promoting broad payment and practice reform 
in primary care, including patient -centered medical 
home models for high-need applicable individuals, 
medical homes that address women's unique health 
care needs, and models that transition primary care 
practices away from fee-for-service based reimburse- 
ment and toward comprehensive payment or salary- 
based payment. 

"(ii) Contracting directly with groups of providers 
of services and suppliers to promote innovative care 
delivery models, such as through risk-based com- 
prehensive payment or salary-based payment. 

"(iii) Utilizing geriatric assessments and com- 
prehensive care plans to coordinate the care (including 
through interdisciplinary teams) of applicable individ- 
uals with multiple chronic conditions and at least one 
of the following: 

"(I) An inability to perform 2 or more activi- 
ties of daily living. 

"(II) Cognitive impairment, including demen- 
tia. 

"(iv) Promote care coordination between providers 
of services and suppliers that transition health care 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3021U115A SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



308 



providers away from fee-for-service based reimburse- 
ment and toward salary-based payment. 

"(v) Supporting care coordination for chronically-ill 
applicable individuals at high risk of hospitalization 
through a health information technology-enabled pro- 
vider network that includes care coordinators, a chron- 
ic disease registry, and home tele-health technology. 

"(vi) Varying payment to physicians who order ad- 
vanced diagnostic imaging services (as defined in sec- 
tion 1834(e)(1)(B)) according to the physician's adher- 
ence to appropriateness criteria for the ordering of 
such services, as determined in consultation with phy- 
sician specialty groups and other relevant stake- 
holders. 

"(vii) Utilizing medication therapy management 
services, such as those described in section 935 of the 
Public Health Service Act. 

"(viii) Establishing community-based health teams 
to support small-practice medical homes by assisting 
the primary care practitioner in chronic care manage- 
ment, including patient self-management, activities. 

"(ix) Assisting applicable individuals in making in- 
formed health care choices by paying providers of serv- 
ices and suppliers for using patient decision-support 
tools, including tools that meet the standards devel- 
oped and identified under section 936(c)(2)(A) of the 
Public Health Service Act, that improve applicable in- 
dividual and caregiver understanding of medical treat- 
ment options. 

"(x) Allowing States to test and evaluate fully in- 
tegrating care for dual eligible individuals in the 
State, including the management and oversight of all 
funds under the applicable titles with respect to such 
individuals. 

"(xi) Allowing States to test and evaluate systems 
of all-payer payment reform for the medical care of 
residents of the State, including dual eligible individ- 
uals. 

"(xii) Aligning nationally recognized, evidence- 
based guidelines of cancer care with payment incen- 
tives under title XVIII in the areas of treatment plan- 
ning and follow-up care planning for applicable indi- 
viduals described in clause (i) or (iii) of subsection 
(a)(4)(A) with cancer, including the identification of 
gaps in applicable quality measures. 

"(xiii) Improving post-acute care through con- 
tinuing care hospitals that offer inpatient rehabilita- 
tion, long-term care hospitals, and home health or 
skilled nursing care during an inpatient stay and the 
30 days immediately following discharge. 

"(xiv) Funding home health providers who offer 
chronic care management services to applicable indi- 
viduals in cooperation with interdisciplinary teams. 

June 9, 2010 



309 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3021M115A SSA 



"(xv) Promoting improved quality and reduced cost 
by developing a collaborative of high-quality, low-cost 
health care institutions that is responsible for — 

"(I) developing, documenting, and dissemi- 
nating best practices and proven care methods; 

"(II) implementing such best practices and 
proven care methods within such institutions to 
demonstrate further improvements in quality and 
efficiency; and 

"(III) providing assistance to other health care 
institutions on how best to employ such best prac- 
tices and proven care methods to improve health 
care quality and lower costs. 

"(xvi) Facilitate inpatient care, including intensive 
care, of hospitalized applicable individuals at their 
local hospital through the use of electronic monitoring 
by specialists, including intensivists and critical care 
specialists, based at integrated health systems. 

"(xvii) Promoting greater efficiencies and timely 
access to outpatient services (such as outpatient phys- 
ical therapy services) through models that do not re- 
quire a physician or other health professional to refer 
the service or be involved in establishing the plan of 
care for the service, when such service is furnished by 
a health professional who has the authority to furnish 
the service under existing State law. 

"(xviii) Establishing comprehensive payments to 
Healthcare Innovation Zones, consisting of groups of 
providers that include a teaching hospital, physicians, 
and other clinical entities, that, through their struc- 
ture, operations, and joint-activity deliver a full spec- 
trum of integrated and comprehensive health care 
services to applicable individuals while also incor- 
porating innovative methods for the clinical training of 
future health care professionals. 
[Clauses (xix) and (xx) added by section 10306(2)(B)~\ 

"(xix) Utilizing, in particular in entities located in 
medically underserved areas and facilities of the In- 
dian Health Service (whether operated by such Service 
or by an Indian tribe or tribal organization (as those 
terms are defined in section 4 of the Indian Health 
Care Improvement Act)), telehealth services — 

"(I) in treating behavioral health issues (such 

as post-traumatic stress disorder) and stroke; and 
"(II) to improve the capacity of non-medical 

providers and non-specialized medical providers to 

provide health services for patients with chronic 

complex conditions. 

"(xx) Utilizing a diverse network of providers of 
services and suppliers to improve care coordination for 
applicable individuals described in subsection 
(a)(4)(A)(i) with 2 or more chronic conditions and a 
history of prior-year hospitalization through interven- 
tions developed under the Medicare Coordinated Care 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3021U115A SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



310 



Demonstration Project under section 4016 of the Bal- 
anced Budget Act of 1997 (42 U.S.C. 1395b-l note). 
"(C) Additional factors for consideration. — In se- 
lecting models for testing under subparagraph (A), the 
CMI may consider the following additional factors: 

"(i) Whether the model includes a regular process 
for monitoring and updating patient care plans in a 
manner that is consistent with the needs and pref- 
erences of applicable individuals. 

"(ii) Whether the model places the applicable indi- 
vidual, including family members and other informal 
caregivers of the applicable individual, at the center of 
the care team of the applicable individual. 

"(hi) Whether the model provides for in-person 
contact with applicable individuals. 

"(iv) Whether the model utilizes technology, such 
as electronic health records and patient-based remote 
monitoring systems, to coordinate care over time and 
across settings. 

"(v) Whether the model provides for the mainte- 
nance of a close relationship between care coordina- 
tors, primary care practitioners, specialist physicians, 
community-based organizations, and other providers of 
services and suppliers. 

"(vi) Whether the model relies on a team-based 
approach to interventions, such as comprehensive care 
assessments, care planning, and self-management 
coaching. 

"(vii) Whether, under the model, providers of serv- 
ices and suppliers are able to share information with 
patients, caregivers, and other providers of services 
and suppliers on a real time basis. 

"(viii) [As added by section 10306(2)(CJ\ Whether 
the model demonstrates effective linkage with other 
public sector or private sector payers. 
"(3) Budget neutrality. — 

"(A) Initial period. — The Secretary shall not require, 
as a condition for testing a model under paragraph (1), 
that the design of such model ensure that such model is 
budget neutral initially with respect to expenditures under 
the applicable title. 

"(B) Termination or modification. — The Secretary 
shall terminate or modify the design and implementation 
of a model unless the Secretary determines (and the Chief 
Actuary of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services, 
with respect to program spending under the applicable 
title, certifies), after testing has begun, that the model is 
expected to — 

"(i) improve the quality of care (as determined by 
the Administrator of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Med- 
icaid Services) without increasing spending under the 
applicable title; 

"(ii) reduce spending under the applicable title 
without reducing the quality of care; or 

June 9, 2010 



311 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3021M115A SSA 



"(iii) improve the quality of care and reduce 
spending. 

Such termination may occur at any time after such testing 

has begun and before completion of the testing. 

"(4) Evaluation. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall conduct an 

evaluation of each model tested under this subsection. 

Such evaluation shall include an analysis of — 

"(i) the quality of care furnished under the model, 
including the measurement of patient-level outcomes 
and patient-centeredness criteria determined appro- 
priate by the Secretary; and 

"(ii) the changes in spending under the applicable 
titles by reason of the model. 

"(B) Information. — The Secretary shall make the re- 
sults of each evaluation under this paragraph available to 
the public in a timely fashion and may establish require- 
ments for States and other entities participating in the 
testing of models under this section to collect and report 
information that the Secretary determines is necessary to 
monitor and evaluate such models. 

"(C) Measure selection. — [As added by section 
10306(3)~\ To the extent feasible, the Secretary shall select 
measures under this paragraph that reflect national prior- 
ities for quality improvement and patient-centered care 
consistent with the measures described in 1890(b)(7)(B). 
"(c) Expansion of Models (Phase II). — Taking into account 
the evaluation under subsection (b)(4), the Secretary may, through 
rulemaking, expand (including implementation on a nationwide 
basis) the duration and the scope of a model that is being tested 
under subsection (b) or a demonstration project under section 
1866C, to the extent determined appropriate by the Secretary, if — 
[As revised by section 10306(4)1 

"(1) the Secretary determines that such expansion is ex- 
pected to — 

"(A) reduce spending under applicable title without re- 
ducing the quality of care; or 

"(B) improve the quality of patient care without in- 
creasing spending; 

"(2) the Chief Actuary of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Med- 
icaid Services certifies that such expansion would reduce (or 
would not result in any increase in) net program spending 
under applicable titles; and 

[Paragraph (3) and succeeding sentence added by section 
10306(4)1 

"(3) the Secretary determines that such expansion would 
not deny or limit the coverage or provision of benefits under 
the applicable title for applicable individuals. 
In determining which models or demonstration projects to expand 
under the preceding sentence, the Secretary shall focus on models 
and demonstration projects that improve the quality of patient care 
and reduce spending. 

"(d) Implementation. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3021U115A SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



312 



"(1) Waiver authority. — The Secretary may waive such 
requirements of titles XI and XVIII and of sections 1902(a)(1), 
1902(a)(13), and 1903(m)(2)(A)(iii) as may be necessary solely 
for purposes of carrying out this section with respect to testing 
models described in subsection (b). 

"(2) Limitations on review. — There shall be no adminis- 
trative or judicial review under section 1869, section 1878, or 
otherwise of — 

"(A) the selection of models for testing or expansion 
under this section; 

"(B) the selection of organizations, sites, or partici- 
pants to test those models selected; 

"(C) the elements, parameters, scope, and duration of 
such models for testing or dissemination; 

"(D) determinations regarding budget neutrality under 
subsection (b)(3); 

"(E) the termination or modification of the design and 
implementation of a model under subsection (b)(3)(B); and 
"(F) determinations about expansion of the duration 
and scope of a model under subsection (c), including the 
determination that a model is not expected to meet criteria 
described in paragraph (1) or (2) of such subsection. 
"(3) Administration. — Chapter 35 of title 44, United 
States Code, shall not apply to the testing and evaluation of 
models or expansion of such models under this section. 
"(e) Application to CHIP. — The Center may carry out activi- 
ties under this section with respect to title XXI in the same man- 
ner as provided under this section with respect to the program 
under the applicable titles. 
"(f) Funding.— 

"(1) In general. — There are appropriated, from amounts 
in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated — 

"(A) $5,000,000 for the design, implementation, and 
evaluation of models under subsection (b) for fiscal year 
2010; 

"(B) $10,000,000,000 for the activities initiated under 
this section for the period of fiscal years 2011 through 
2019; and 

"(C) the amount described in subparagraph (B) for the 
activities initiated under this section for each subsequent 
10-year fiscal period (beginning with the 10-year fiscal pe- 
riod beginning with fiscal year 2020). 
Amounts appropriated under the preceding sentence shall re- 
main available until expended. 

"(2) Use of certain funds. — Out of amounts appropriated 
under subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph (1), not less 
than $25,000,000 shall be made available each such fiscal year 
to design, implement, and evaluate models under subsection 
(b). 

"(g) Report to Congress. — Beginning in 2012, and not less 
than once every other year thereafter, the Secretary shall submit 
to Congress a report on activities under this section. Each such re- 
port shall describe the models tested under subsection (b), includ- 
ing the number of individuals described in subsection (a)(4)(A)(i) 

June 9, 2010 



313 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3022X1899 SSA 



and of individuals described in subsection (a)(4)(A)(ii) participating 
in such models and payments made under applicable titles for serv- 
ices on behalf of such individuals, any models chosen for expansion 
under subsection (c), and the results from evaluations under sub- 
section (b)(4). In addition, each such report shall provide such rec- 
ommendations as the Secretary determines are appropriate for leg- 
islative action to facilitate the development and expansion of suc- 
cessful payment models.". 

(b) Medicaid Conforming Amendment. — Section 1902(a) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)), as amended by section 
8002(b), is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (81), by striking "and" at the end; 

(2) in paragraph (82), by striking the period at the end and 
inserting "; and"; and 

(3) by inserting after paragraph (82) the following new 
paragraph: 

"(83) provide for implementation of the payment models 
specified by the Secretary under section 1115A(c) for imple- 
mentation on a nationwide basis unless the State demonstrates 
to the satisfaction of the Secretary that implementation would 
not be administratively feasible or appropriate to the health 
care delivery system of the State.". 

(c) Revisions to Health Care Quality Demonstration Pro- 
gram. — Subsections (b) and (f) of section 1866C of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc-3) are amended by striking "5-year" 
each place it appears. 

SEC. 3022. MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM. 

Title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) 
is amended by adding at the end the following new section: 

"shared savings program 

"Sec. 1899 [42 U.S.C. 1395jjj]. (a) Establishment.— 

"(1) In general. — Not later than January 1, 2012, the Sec- 
retary shall establish a shared savings program (in this section 
referred to as the 'program') that promotes accountability for a 
patient population and coordinates items and services under 
parts A and B, and encourages investment in infrastructure 
and redesigned care processes for high quality and efficient 
service delivery. Under such program — 

"(A) groups of providers of services and suppliers 
meeting criteria specified by the Secretary may work to- 
gether to manage and coordinate care for Medicare fee-for- 
service beneficiaries through an accountable care organiza- 
tion (referred to in this section as an ACO'); and 

"(B) ACOs that meet quality performance standards 
established by the Secretary are eligible to receive pay- 
ments for shared savings under subsection (d)(2). 
"(b) Eligible ACOs.— 

"(1) In general. — Subject to the succeeding provisions of 
this subsection, as determined appropriate by the Secretary, 
the following groups of providers of services and suppliers 
which have established a mechanism for shared governance 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3022U899 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



314 



are eligible to participate as ACOs under the program under 
this section: 

"(A) ACO professionals in group practice arrange- 
ments. 

"(B) Networks of individual practices of ACO profes- 
sionals. 

"(C) Partnerships or joint venture arrangements be- 
tween hospitals and ACO professionals. 

"(D) Hospitals employing ACO professionals. 

"(E) Such other groups of providers of services and 
suppliers as the Secretary determines appropriate. 
"(2) Requirements. — An ACO shall meet the following re- 
quirements: 

"(A) The ACO shall be willing to become accountable 
for the quality, cost, and overall care of the Medicare fee- 
for-service beneficiaries assigned to it. 

"(B) The ACO shall enter into an agreement with the 
Secretary to participate in the program for not less than 
a 3-year period (referred to in this section as the 'agree- 
ment period')- 

"(C) The ACO shall have a formal legal structure that 
would allow the organization to receive and distribute pay- 
ments for shared savings under subsection (d)(2) to partici- 
pating providers of services and suppliers. 

"(D) The ACO shall include primary care ACO profes- 
sionals that are sufficient for the number of Medicare fee- 
for-service beneficiaries assigned to the ACO under sub- 
section (c). At a minimum, the ACO shall have at least 
5,000 such beneficiaries assigned to it under subsection (c) 
in order to be eligible to participate in the ACO program. 

"(E) The ACO shall provide the Secretary with such 
information regarding ACO professionals participating in 
the ACO as the Secretary determines necessary to support 
the assignment of Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries to 
an ACO, the implementation of quality and other reporting 
requirements under paragraph (3), and the determination 
of payments for shared savings under subsection (d)(2). 

"(F) The ACO shall have in place a leadership and 
management structure that includes clinical and adminis- 
trative systems. 

"(G) The ACO shall define processes to promote evi- 
dence-based medicine and patient engagement, report on 
quality and cost measures, and coordinate care, such as 
through the use of telehealth, remote patient monitoring, 
and other such enabling technologies. 

"(H) The ACO shall demonstrate to the Secretary that 
it meets patient-centeredness criteria specified by the Sec- 
retary, such as the use of patient and caregiver assess- 
ments or the use of individualized care plans. 
"(3) Quality and other reporting requirements. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall determine ap- 
propriate measures to assess the quality of care furnished 
by the ACO, such as measures of — 

"(i) clinical processes and outcomes; 

June 9, 2010 



315 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3022X1899 SSA 



"(ii) patient and, where practicable, caregiver ex- 
perience of care; and 

"(hi) utilization (such as rates of hospital admis- 
sions for ambulatory care sensitive conditions). 
"(B) Reporting requirements. — An ACO shall sub- 
mit data in a form and manner specified by the Secretary 
on measures the Secretary determines necessary for the 
ACO to report in order to evaluate the quality of care fur- 
nished by the ACO. Such data may include care transi- 
tions across health care settings, including hospital dis- 
charge planning and post-hospital discharge follow-up by 
ACO professionals, as the Secretary determines appro- 
priate. 

"(C) Quality performance standards. — The Sec- 
retary shall establish quality performance standards to as- 
sess the quality of care furnished by ACOs. The Secretary 
shall seek to improve the quality of care furnished by 
ACOs over time by specifying higher standards, new meas- 
ures, or both for purposes of assessing such quality of care. 

"(D) Other reporting requirements. — The Secretary 
may, as the Secretary determines appropriate, incorporate 
reporting requirements and incentive payments related to 
the physician quality reporting initiative (PQRI) under sec- 
tion 1848, including such requirements and such payments 
related to electronic prescribing, electronic health records, 
and other similar initiatives under section 1848, and may 
use alternative criteria than would otherwise apply under 
such section for determining whether to make such pay- 
ments. The incentive payments described in the preceding 
sentence shall not be taken into consideration when calcu- 
lating any payments otherwise made under subsection (d). 
"(4) NO DUPLICATION IN PARTICIPATION IN SHARED SAVINGS 

programs. — A provider of services or supplier that participates 
in any of the following shall not be eligible to participate in an 
ACO under this section: 

"(A) A model tested or expanded under section 1115A 
that involves shared savings under this title, or any other 
program or demonstration project that involves such 
shared savings. 

"(B) The independence at home medical practice pilot 
program under section 1866E. 
"(c) Assignment of Medicare Fee-for-service Beneficiaries 
to ACOs. — The Secretary shall determine an appropriate method 
to assign Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries to an ACO based on 
their utilization of primary care services provided under this title 
by an ACO professional described in subsection (h)(1)(A). 
"(d) Payments and Treatment of Savings. — 
"(1) Payments. — 

"(A) In general. — Under the program, subject to 
paragraph (3), payments shall continue to be made to pro- 
viders of services and suppliers participating in an ACO 
under the original Medicare fee-for-service program under 
parts A and B in the same manner as they would other- 
wise be made except that a participating ACO is eligible 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3022U899 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



316 



to receive payment for shared savings under paragraph (2) 
if— 

"(i) the ACO meets quality performance standards 
established by the Secretary under subsection (b)(3); 
and 

"(ii) the ACO meets the requirement under sub- 
paragraph (B)(i). 

"(B) Savings requirement and benchmark. — 

"(i) Determining savings. — In each year of the 
agreement period, an ACO shall be eligible to receive 
payment for shared savings under paragraph (2) only 
if the estimated average per capita Medicare expendi- 
tures under the ACO for Medicare fee-for-service bene- 
ficiaries for parts A and B services, adjusted for bene- 
ficiary characteristics, is at least the percent specified 
by the Secretary below the applicable benchmark 
under clause (ii). The Secretary shall determine the 
appropriate percent described in the preceding sen- 
tence to account for normal variation in expenditures 
under this title, based upon the number of Medicare 
fee-for-service beneficiaries assigned to an ACO. 

"(ii) Establish and update benchmark. — The 
Secretary shall estimate a benchmark for each agree- 
ment period for each ACO using the most recent avail- 
able 3 years of per-beneficiary expenditures for parts 
A and B services for Medicare fee-for-service bene- 
ficiaries assigned to the ACO. Such benchmark shall 
be adjusted for beneficiary characteristics and such 
other factors as the Secretary determines appropriate 
and updated by the projected absolute amount of 
growth in national per capita expenditures for parts A 
and B services under the original Medicare fee-for- 
service program, as estimated by the Secretary. Such 
benchmark shall be reset at the start of each agree- 
ment period. 

"(2) Payments for shared savings. — Subject to perform- 
ance with respect to the quality performance standards estab- 
lished by the Secretary under subsection (b)(3), if an ACO 
meets the requirements under paragraph (1), a percent (as de- 
termined appropriate by the Secretary) of the difference be- 
tween such estimated average per capita Medicare expendi- 
tures in a year, adjusted for beneficiary characteristics, under 
the ACO and such benchmark for the ACO may be paid to the 
ACO as shared savings and the remainder of such difference 
shall be retained by the program under this title. The Sec- 
retary shall establish limits on the total amount of shared sav- 
ings that may be paid to an ACO under this paragraph. 

"(3) Monitoring avoidance of at-risk patients. — If the 
Secretary determines that an ACO has taken steps to avoid pa- 
tients at risk in order to reduce the likelihood of increasing 
costs to the ACO the Secretary may impose an appropriate 
sanction on the ACO, including termination from the program. 

"(4) Termination. — The Secretary may terminate an 
agreement with an ACO if it does not meet the quality per- 

June 9, 2010 



317 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3022X1899 SSA 



formance standards established by the Secretary under sub- 
section (b)(3). 

"(e) Administration. — Chapter 35 of title 44, United States 
Code, shall not apply to the program. 

"(f) Waiver Authority. — The Secretary may waive such re- 
quirements of sections 1128A and 1128B and title XVIII of this Act 
as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. 

"(g) Limitations on Review. — There shall be no administra- 
tive or judicial review under section 1869, section 1878, or other- 
wise of — 

"(1) the specification of criteria under subsection (a)(1)(B); 

"(2) the assessment of the quality of care furnished by an 
ACO and the establishment of performance standards under 
subsection (b)(3); 

"(3) the assignment of Medicare fee-for-service bene- 
ficiaries to an ACO under subsection (c); 

"(4) the determination of whether an ACO is eligible for 
shared savings under subsection (d)(2) and the amount of such 
shared savings, including the determination of the estimated 
average per capita Medicare expenditures under the ACO for 
Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries assigned to the ACO and 
the average benchmark for the ACO under subsection (d)(1)(B); 

"(5) the percent of shared savings specified by the Sec- 
retary under subsection (d)(2) and any limit on the total 
amount of shared savings established by the Secretary under 
such subsection; and 

"(6) the termination of an ACO under subsection (d)(4). 
"(h) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(1) ACO professional. — The term ACO professional' 
means — 

"(A) a physician (as defined in section 1861(r)(l)); and 
"(B) a practitioner described in section 
1842(bX18XCXi). 

"(2) Hospital. — The term 'hospital' means a subsection (d) 
hospital (as defined in section 1886(d)(1)(B)). 

"(3) Medicare fee-for-service beneficiary. — The term 
'Medicare fee-for-service beneficiary' means an individual who 
is enrolled in the original Medicare fee-for-service program 
under parts A and B and is not enrolled in an MA plan under 
part C, an eligible organization under section 1876, or a PACE 
program under section 1894. 
[Subsections (i)-(k) added by section 10307] 
"(i) Option To Use Other Payment Models. — 

"(1) In general. — If the Secretary determines appropriate, 
the Secretary may use any of the payment models described in 
paragraph (2) or (3) for making payments under the program 
rather than the payment model described in subsection (d). 
"(2) Partial capitation model. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (B), a 
model described in this paragraph is a partial capitation 
model in which an ACO is at financial risk for some, but 
not all, of the items and services covered under parts A 
and B, such as at risk for some or all physicians' services 
or all items and services under part B. The Secretary may 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3023 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



318 



limit a partial capitation model to ACOs that are highly 
integrated systems of care and to ACOs capable of bearing 
risk, as determined to be appropriate by the Secretary. 

"(B) No additional program expenditures. — Pay- 
ments to an ACO for items and services under this title for 
beneficiaries for a year under the partial capitation model 
shall be established in a manner that does not result in 
spending more for such ACO for such beneficiaries than 
would otherwise be expended for such ACO for such bene- 
ficiaries for such year if the model were not implemented, 
as estimated by the Secretary. 
"(3) Other payment models. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (B), a 
model described in this paragraph is any payment model 
that the Secretary determines will improve the quality and 
efficiency of items and services furnished under this title. 

"(B) No additional program expenditures. — Sub- 
paragraph (B) of paragraph (2) shall apply to a payment 
model under subparagraph (A) in a similar manner as 
such subparagraph (B) applies to the payment model 
under paragraph (2). 
"(j) Involvement in Private Payer and Other Third Party 
Arrangements. — The Secretary may give preference to ACOs who 
are participating in similar arrangements with other payers. 

"(k) Treatment of Physician Group Practice Demonstra- 
tion. — During the period beginning on the date of the enactment 
of this section and ending on the date the program is established, 
the Secretary may enter into an agreement with an ACO under the 
demonstration under section 1866A, subject to rebasing and other 
modifications deemed appropriate by the Secretary.". 

SEC. 3023. NATIONAL PILOT PROGRAM ON PAYMENT BUNDLING. 

Title XVIII of the Social Security Act, as amended by section 
3021, is amended by inserting after section 1866C the following 
new section: [As revised by section 10308(b)(l)~\ 

"national pilot program on payment bundling 

"Sec. 1866D [42 U.S.C. 1395cc-4]. (a) Implementation.— 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall establish a pilot 
program for integrated care during an episode of care provided 
to an applicable beneficiary around a hospitalization in order 
to improve the coordination, quality, and efficiency of health 
care services under this title. 

"(2) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(A) Applicable beneficiary. — The term 'applicable 
beneficiary' means an individual who — 

"(i) is entitled to, or enrolled for, benefits under 
part A and enrolled for benefits under part B of such 
title, but not enrolled under part C or a PACE pro- 
gram under section 1894; and 

"(ii) is admitted to a hospital for an applicable 
condition. 

"(B) Applicable condition. — The term 'applicable 
condition' means 1 or more of 10 conditions selected by the 

June 9, 2010 



319 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3023M866D SSA 



Secretary. In selecting conditions under the preceding sen- 
tence, the Secretary shall take into consideration the fol- 
lowing factors: [As revised by section 10308(^(1)1 

"(i) Whether the conditions selected include a mix 
of chronic and acute conditions. 

"(ii) Whether the conditions selected include a mix 
of surgical and medical conditions. 

"(hi) Whether a condition is one for which there is 
evidence of an opportunity for providers of services 
and suppliers to improve the quality of care furnished 
while reducing total expenditures under this title. 

"(iv) Whether a condition has significant variation 

in — 

"(I) the number of readmissions; and 
"(II) the amount of expenditures for post- 
acute care spending under this title. 

"(v) Whether a condition is high-volume and has 
high post-acute care expenditures under this title. 

"(vi) Which conditions the Secretary determines 
are most amenable to bundling across the spectrum of 
care given practice patterns under this title. 
"(C) Applicable services. — The term 'applicable serv- 
ices' means the following: 

"(i) Acute care inpatient services. 

"(ii) Physicians' services delivered in and outside 
of an acute care hospital setting. 

"(hi) Outpatient hospital services, including emer- 
gency department services. 

"(iv) Post-acute care services, including home 
health services, skilled nursing services, inpatient re- 
habilitation services, and inpatient hospital services 
furnished by a long-term care hospital. 

"(v) Other services the Secretary determines ap- 
propriate. 

"(D) Episode of care. — 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), the term 
'episode of care' means, with respect to an applicable 
condition and an applicable beneficiary, the period 
that includes — 

"(I) the 3 days prior to the admission of the 
applicable beneficiary to a hospital for the applica- 
ble condition; 

"(II) the length of stay of the applicable bene- 
ficiary in such hospital; and 

"(HI) the 30 days following the discharge of 
the applicable beneficiary from such hospital, 
"(ii) Establishment of period by the sec- 
retary. — The Secretary, as appropriate, may establish 
a period (other than the period described in clause (i)) 
for an episode of care under the pilot program. 
"(E) Physicians' services. — The term 'physicians' 
services' has the meaning given such term in section 
1861(q). 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3023M 866D SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



320 



"(F) Pilot program. — The term 'pilot program' means 
the pilot program under this section. 

"(G) Provider of services. — The term 'provider of 
services' has the meaning given such term in section 
1861(u). 

"(H) Readmission. — The term 'readmission' has the 
meaning given such term in section 1886(q)(5)(E). 

"(I) Supplier. — The term 'supplier' has the meaning 
given such term in section 1861(d). 

"(3) Deadline for implementation. — The Secretary shall 
establish the pilot program not later than January 1, 2013. 
"(b) Developmental Phase. — 

"(1) Determination of patient assessment instru- 
ment. — The Secretary shall determine which patient assess- 
ment instrument (such as the Continuity Assessment Record 
and Evaluation (CARE) tool) shall be used under the pilot pro- 
gram to evaluate the applicable condition of an applicable ben- 
eficiary for purposes of determining the most clinically appro- 
priate site for the provision of post-acute care to the applicable 
beneficiary. 

"(2) Development of quality measures for an episode 
of care and for post-acute care. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary, in consultation with 
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and the 
entity with a contract under section 1890(a) of the Social 
Security Act, shall develop quality measures for use in the 
pilot program — 

"(i) for episodes of care; and 
"(ii) for post-acute care. 
"(B) Site-neutral post-acute care quality meas- 
ures. — Any quality measures developed under subpara- 
graph (A)(ii) shall be site-neutral. 

"(C) Coordination with quality measure develop- 
ment and endorsement procedures. — The Secretary 
shall ensure that the development of quality measures 
under subparagraph (A) is done in a manner that is con- 
sistent with the measures developed and endorsed under 
section 1890 and 1890A that are applicable to all post- 
acute care settings. 
"(c) Details. — 

"(1) Duration. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
pilot program shall be conducted for a period of 5 years. 

"(B) Expansion. — [Replaced by section 10308(a)(2)~\ 
The Secretary may, at any point after January 1, 2016, ex- 
pand the duration and scope of the pilot program, to the 
extent determined appropriate by the Secretary, if — 

"(i) the Secretary determines that such expansion 
is expected to — 

"(I) reduce spending under title XVIII of the 
Social Security Act without reducing the quality of 
care; or 

"(II) improve the quality of care and reduce 
spending; 

June 9, 2010 



321 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3023U866D SSA 



"(ii) the Chief Actuary of the Centers for Medicare 
&amp; Medicaid Services certifies that such expansion 
would reduce program spending under such title 
XVIII; and 

"(hi) the Secretary determines that such expan- 
sion would not deny or limit the coverage or provision 
of benefits under this title for individuals. 
"(2) Participating providers of services and sup- 
pliers. — 

"(A) In general. — An entity comprised of providers of 
services and suppliers, including a hospital, a physician 
group, a skilled nursing facility, and a home health agen- 
cy, who are otherwise participating under this title, may 
submit an application to the Secretary to provide applica- 
ble services to applicable individuals under this section. 

"(B) Requirements. — The Secretary shall develop re- 
quirements for entities to participate in the pilot program 
under this section. Such requirements shall ensure that 
applicable beneficiaries have an adequate choice of pro- 
viders of services and suppliers under the pilot program. 
"(3) Payment methodology. — 
"(A) In general. — 

"(i) Establishment of payment methods. — The 
Secretary shall develop payment methods for the pilot 
program for entities participating in the pilot program. 
Such payment methods may include bundled pay- 
ments and bids from entities for episodes of care. The 
Secretary shall make payments to the entity for serv- 
ices covered under this section. 

"(ii) NO ADDITIONAL PROGRAM EXPENDITURES. — 

Payments under this section for applicable items and 
services under this title (including payment for serv- 
ices described in subparagraph (B)) for applicable 
beneficiaries for a year shall be established in a man- 
ner that does not result in spending more for such en- 
tity for such beneficiaries than would otherwise be ex- 
pended for such entity for such beneficiaries for such 
year if the pilot program were not implemented, as es- 
timated by the Secretary. 

"(B) Inclusion of certain services. — A payment 
methodology tested under the pilot program shall include 
payment for the furnishing of applicable services and other 
appropriate services, such as care coordination, medication 
reconciliation, discharge planning, transitional care serv- 
ices, and other patient-centered activities as determined 
appropriate by the Secretary. 
"(C) Bundled payments. — 

"(i) In general. — A bundled payment under the 
pilot program shall — 

"(I) be comprehensive, covering the costs of 
applicable services and other appropriate services 
furnished to an individual during an episode of 
care (as determined by the Secretary); and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3023M 866D SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



322 



"(II) be made to the entity which is partici- 
pating in the pilot program, 
"(ii) Requirement for provision of applicable 

SERVICES AND OTHER APPROPRIATE SERVICES. — Applica- 
ble services and other appropriate services for which 
payment is made under this subparagraph shall be 
furnished or directed by the entity which is partici- 
pating in the pilot program. 

"(D) Payment for post-acute care services after 
the episode of care. — The Secretary shall establish pro- 
cedures, in the case where an applicable beneficiary re- 
quires continued post-acute care services after the last day 
of the episode of care, under which payment for such serv- 
ices shall be made. 
"(4) Quality measures. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall establish qual- 
ity measures (including quality measures of process, out- 
come, and structure) related to care provided by entities 
participating in the pilot program. Quality measures estab- 
lished under the preceding sentence shall include meas- 
ures of the following: 

"(i) Functional status improvement. 

"(ii) Reducing rates of avoidable hospital readmis- 

sions. 

"(hi) Rates of discharge to the community. 

"(iv) Rates of admission to an emergency room 
after a hospitalization. 

"(v) Incidence of health care acquired infections. 

"(vi) Efficiency measures. 

"(vii) Measures of patient-centeredness of care. 

"(viii) Measures of patient perception of care. 

"(ix) Other measures, including measures of pa- 
tient outcomes, determined appropriate by the Sec- 
retary. 

"(B) Reporting on quality measures. — 

"(i) In general.— A entity shall submit data to 
the Secretary on quality measures established under 
subparagraph (A) during each year of the pilot pro- 
gram (in a form and manner, subject to clause (hi), 
specified by the Secretary). 

"(ii) Submission of data through electronic 
health record. — To the extent practicable, the Sec- 
retary shall specify that data on measures be sub- 
mitted under clause (i) through the use of an qualified 
electronic health record (as defined in section 3000(13) 
of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj- 
11(13)) in a manner specified by the Secretary. 
"(d) Waiver. — The Secretary may waive such provisions of this 
title and title XI as may be necessary to carry out the pilot pro- 
gram. 

"(e) Independent Evaluation and Reports on Pilot Pro- 
gram. — 

June 9, 2010 



323 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3023U866D SSA 



"(1) Independent evaluation. — The Secretary shall con- 
duct an independent evaluation of the pilot program, including 
the extent to which the pilot program has — 

"(A) improved quality measures established under sub- 
section (c)(4)(A); 

"(B) improved health outcomes; 

"(C) improved applicable beneficiary access to care; 

and 

"(D) reduced spending under this title. 
"(2) Reports. — 

"(A) Interim report. — Not later than 2 years after 
the implementation of the pilot program, the Secretary 
shall submit to Congress a report on the initial results of 
the independent evaluation conducted under paragraph 
(1). 

"(B) Final report. — Not later than 3 years after the 
implementation of the pilot program, the Secretary shall 
submit to Congress a report on the final results of the 
independent evaluation conducted under paragraph (1). 
"(f) Consultation. — The Secretary shall consult with rep- 
resentatives of small rural hospitals, including critical access hos- 
pitals (as defined in section 1861(mm)(l)), regarding their partici- 
pation in the pilot program. Such consultation shall include consid- 
eration of innovative methods of implementing bundled payments 
in hospitals described in the preceding sentence, taking into consid- 
eration any difficulties in doing so as a result of the low volume 
of services provided by such hospitals. 

"(g) Application of Pilot Program to Continuing Care 
Hospitals. — [Replaced by section 10308(a)(3)~\ 

"(1) In general. — In conducting the pilot program, the 
Secretary shall apply the provisions of the program so as to 
separately pilot test the continuing care hospital model. 

"(2) Special rules. — In pilot testing the continuing care 
hospital model under paragraph (1), the following rules shall 
apply: 

"(A) Such model shall be tested without the limitation 
to the conditions selected under subsection (a)(2)(B). 

"(B) Notwithstanding subsection (a)(2)(D), an episode 
of care shall be defined as the full period that a patient 
stays in the continuing care hospital plus the first 30 days 
following discharge from such hospital. 
"(3) Continuing care hospital defined. — In this sub- 
section, the term 'continuing care hospital' means an entity 
that has demonstrated the ability to meet patient care and pa- 
tient safety standards and that provides under common man- 
agement the medical and rehabilitation services provided in in- 
patient rehabilitation hospitals and units (as defined in section 
1886(d)(l)(B)(ii)), long term care hospitals (as defined in sec- 
tion 1886(d)(l)(B)(iv)(I)), and skilled nursing facilities (as de- 
fined in section 1819(a)) that are located in a hospital de- 
scribed in section 1886(d). 

"(h) Administration. — Chapter 35 of title 44, United States 
Code, shall not apply to the selection, testing, and evaluation of 
models or the expansion of such models under this section.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3024 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



324 



SEC. 3024. INDEPENDENCE AT HOME DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM. 

Title XVIII of the Social Security Act is amended by inserting 
after section 1866D, as inserted by section 3023, the following new 
section: [As revised by section 10308(b)(2)~\ 

"INDEPENDENCE AT HOME MEDICAL PRACTICE DEMONSTRATION 

PROGRAM 

"Sec. 1866E [42 U.S.C. 1395cc-5]. (a) Establishment.— 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall conduct a dem- 
onstration program (in this section referred to as the 'dem- 
onstration program') to test a payment incentive and service 
delivery model that utilizes physician and nurse practitioner 
directed home-based primary care teams designed to reduce ex- 
penditures and improve health outcomes in the provision of 
items and services under this title to applicable beneficiaries 
(as defined in subsection (d)). 

"(2) Requirement. — The demonstration program shall test 
whether a model described in paragraph (1), which is account- 
able for providing comprehensive, coordinated, continuous, and 
accessible care to high-need populations at home and coordi- 
nating health care across all treatment settings, results in — 
"(A) reducing preventable hospitalizations; 
"(B) preventing hospital readmissions; 
"(C) reducing emergency room visits; 
"(D) improving health outcomes commensurate with 
the beneficiaries' stage of chronic illness; 

"(E) improving the efficiency of care, such as by reduc- 
ing duplicative diagnostic and laboratory tests; 

"(F) reducing the cost of health care services covered 
under this title; and 

"(G) achieving beneficiary and family caregiver satis- 
faction. 

"(b) Independence at Home Medical Practice. — 

"(1) Independence at home medical practice de- 
fined. — In this section: 

"(A) In general. — The term 'independence at home 
medical practice' means a legal entity that — 

"(i) is comprised of an individual physician or 
nurse practitioner or group of physicians and nurse 
practitioners that provides care as part of a team that 
includes physicians, nurses, physician assistants, 
pharmacists, and other health and social services staff 
as appropriate who have experience providing home- 
based primary care to applicable beneficiaries, make 
in-home visits, and are available 24 hours per day, 7 
days per week to carry out plans of care that are tai- 
lored to the individual beneficiary's chronic conditions 
and designed to achieve the results in subsection (a); 

"(ii) is organized at least in part for the purpose 
of providing physicians' services; 

"(hi) has documented experience in providing 
home-based primary care services to high-cost chron- 
ically ill beneficiaries, as determined appropriate by 
the Secretary; 

June 9, 2010 



325 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3024M866E SSA 



"(iv) furnishes services to at least 200 applicable 
beneficiaries (as defined in subsection (d)) during each 
year of the demonstration program; 

"(v) has entered into an agreement with the Sec- 
retary; 

"(vi) uses electronic health information systems, 
remote monitoring, and mobile diagnostic technology; 
and 

"(vii) meets such other criteria as the Secretary 
determines to be appropriate to participate in the 
demonstration program. 
The entity shall report on quality measures (in such form, 
manner, and frequency as specified by the Secretary, 
which may be for the group, for providers of services and 
suppliers, or both) and report to the Secretary (in a form, 
manner, and frequency as specified by the Secretary) such 
data as the Secretary determines appropriate to monitor 
and evaluate the demonstration program. 

"(B) Physician. — The term 'physician' includes, except 
as the Secretary may otherwise provide, any individual 
who furnishes services for which payment may be made as 
physicians' services and has the medical training or experi- 
ence to fulfill the physician's role described in subpara- 
graph (A)(i). 

"(2) Participation of nurse practitioners and physi- 
cian assistants. — Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
prevent a nurse practitioner or physician assistant from par- 
ticipating in, or leading, a home-based primary care team as 
part of an independence at home medical practice if — 

"(A) all the requirements of this section are met; 
"(B) the nurse practitioner or physician assistant, as 
the case may be, is acting consistent with State law; and 
"(C) the nurse practitioner or physician assistant has 
the medical training or experience to fulfill the nurse prac- 
titioner or physician assistant role described in paragraph 
dXAXi). 

"(3) Inclusion of providers and practitioners. — Noth- 
ing in this subsection shall be construed as preventing an inde- 
pendence at home medical practice from including a provider 
of services or a participating practitioner described in section 
1842(b)(18)(C) that is affiliated with the practice under an ar- 
rangement structured so that such provider of services or prac- 
titioner participates in the demonstration program and shares 
in any savings under the demonstration program. 

"(4) Quality and performance standards. — The Sec- 
retary shall develop quality performance standards for inde- 
pendence at home medical practices participating in the dem- 
onstration program. 
"(c) Payment Methodology. — 

"(1) Establishment of target spending level. — The 
Secretary shall establish an estimated annual spending target, 
for the amount the Secretary estimates would have been spent 
in the absence of the demonstration, for items and services cov- 
ered under parts A and B furnished to applicable beneficiaries 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3024U866E SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



326 



for each qualifying independence at home medical practice 
under this section. Such spending targets shall be determined 
on a per capita basis. Such spending targets shall include a 
risk corridor that takes into account normal variation in ex- 
penditures for items and services covered under parts A and B 
furnished to such beneficiaries with the size of the corridor 
being related to the number of applicable beneficiaries fur- 
nished services by each independence at home medical prac- 
tice. The spending targets may also be adjusted for other fac- 
tors as the Secretary determines appropriate. 

"(2) Incentive payments. — Subject to performance on 
quality measures, a qualifying independence at home medical 
practice is eligible to receive an incentive payment under this 
section if actual expenditures for a year for the applicable 
beneficiaries it enrolls are less than the estimated spending 
target established under paragraph (1) for such year. An incen- 
tive payment for such year shall be equal to a portion (as de- 
termined by the Secretary) of the amount by which actual ex- 
penditures (including incentive payments under this para- 
graph) for applicable beneficiaries under parts A and B for 
such year are estimated to be less than 5 percent less than the 
estimated spending target for such year, as determined under 
paragraph (1). 

"(d) Applicable Beneficiaries. — 

"(1) Definition. — In this section, the term 'applicable ben- 
eficiary' means, with respect to a qualifying independence at 
home medical practice, an individual who the practice has de- 
termined — 

"(A) is entitled to benefits under part A and enrolled 
for benefits under part B; 

"(B) is not enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan 
under part C or a PACE program under section 1894; 

"(C) has 2 or more chronic illnesses, such as congestive 
heart failure, diabetes, other dementias designated by the 
Secretary, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, ischemic 
heart disease, stroke, Alzheimer's Disease and 
neurodegenerative diseases, and other diseases and condi- 
tions designated by the Secretary which result in high 
costs under this title; 

"(D) within the past 12 months has had a nonelective 
hospital admission; 

"(E) within the past 12 months has received acute or 
subacute rehabilitation services; 

"(F) has 2 or more functional dependencies requiring 
the assistance of another person (such as bathing, dress- 
ing, toileting, walking, or feeding); and 

"(G) meets such other criteria as the Secretary deter- 
mines appropriate. 

"(2) Patient election to participate. — The Secretary 
shall determine an appropriate method of ensuring that appli- 
cable beneficiaries have agreed to enroll in an independence at 
home medical practice under the demonstration program. En- 
rollment in the demonstration program shall be voluntary. 

June 9, 2010 



327 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3024M866E SSA 



"(3) Beneficiary access to services. — Nothing in this 
section shall be construed as encouraging physicians or nurse 
practitioners to limit applicable beneficiary access to services 
covered under this title and applicable beneficiaries shall not 
be required to relinquish access to any benefit under this title 
as a condition of receiving services from an independence at 
home medical practice. 
"(e) Implementation. — 

"(1) Starting date. — The demonstration program shall 
begin no later than January 1, 2012. An agreement with an 
independence at home medical practice under the demonstra- 
tion program may cover not more than a 3-year period. 

"(2) NO PHYSICIAN DUPLICATION IN DEMONSTRATION PAR- 
TICIPATION. — The Secretary shall not pay an independence at 
home medical practice under this section that participates in 
section 1899. 

"(3) NO BENEFICIARY DUPLICATION IN DEMONSTRATION PAR- 
TICIPATION. — The Secretary shall ensure that no applicable 
beneficiary enrolled in an independence at home medical prac- 
tice under this section is participating in the programs under 
section 1899. 

"(4) Preference. — In approving an independence at home 
medical practice, the Secretary shall give preference to prac- 
tices that are — 

"(A) located in high-cost areas of the country; 

"(B) have experience in furnishing health care services 

to applicable beneficiaries in the home; and 

"(C) use electronic medical records, health information 

technology, and individualized plans of care. 

"(5) Limitation on number of practices. — In selecting 
qualified independence at home medical practices to partici- 
pate under the demonstration program, the Secretary shall 
limit the number of such practices so that the number of appli- 
cable beneficiaries that may participate in the demonstration 
program does not exceed 10,000. 

"(6) Waiver. — The Secretary may waive such provisions of 
this title and title XI as the Secretary determines necessary in 
order to implement the demonstration program. 

"(7) Administration. — Chapter 35 of title 44, United 
States Code, shall not apply to this section. 
"(f) Evaluation and Monitoring. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall evaluate each inde- 
pendence at home medical practice under the demonstration 
program to assess whether the practice achieved the results 
described in subsection (a). 

"(2) Monitoring applicable beneficiaries. — The Sec- 
retary may monitor data on expenditures and quality of serv- 
ices under this title after an applicable beneficiary discontinues 
receiving services under this title through a qualifying inde- 
pendence at home medical practice. 

"(g) Reports to Congress. — The Secretary shall conduct an 
independent evaluation of the demonstration program and submit 
to Congress a final report, including best practices under the dem- 
onstration program. Such report shall include an analysis of the 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3025 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



328 



demonstration program on coordination of care, expenditures under 
this title, applicable beneficiary access to services, and the quality 
of health care services provided to applicable beneficiaries. 

"(h) Funding. — For purposes of administering and carrying out 
the demonstration program, other than for payments for items and 
services furnished under this title and incentive payments under 
subsection (c), in addition to funds otherwise appropriated, there 
shall be transferred to the Secretary for the Center for Medicare 
&amp; Medicaid Services Program Management Account from the Fed- 
eral Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under section 1817 and the 
Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund under sec- 
tion 1841 (in proportions determined appropriate by the Secretary) 
$5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2015. Amounts 
transferred under this subsection for a fiscal year shall be available 
until expended. 

"(i) Termination. — 

"(1) Mandatory termination. — The Secretary shall termi- 
nate an agreement with an independence at home medical 
practice if — 

"(A) the Secretary estimates or determines that such 
practice will not receive an incentive payment for the sec- 
ond of 2 consecutive years under the demonstration pro- 
gram; or 

"(B) such practice fails to meet quality standards dur- 
ing any year of the demonstration program. 
"(2) Permissive termination. — The Secretary may termi- 
nate an agreement with an independence at home medical 
practice for such other reasons determined appropriate by the 
Secretary.". 

SEC. 3025. HOSPITAL READMISSIONS REDUCTION PROGRAM. 

(a) In General. — Section 1886 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395ww), as amended by sections 3001 and 3008, is amend- 
ed by adding at the end the following new subsection: 
"(q) Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program. — 

"(1) In general. — With respect to payment for discharges 
from an applicable hospital (as defined in paragraph (5)(C)) oc- 
curring during a fiscal year beginning on or after October 1, 
2012, in order to account for excess readmissions in the hos- 
pital, the Secretary shall make payments (in addition to the 
payments described in paragraph (2)(A)(ii)) for such a dis- 
charge to such hospital under subsection (d) (or section 
1814(b)(3), as the case may be) in an amount equal to the prod- 
uct of — [As revised by section 10309] 

"(A) the base operating DRG payment amount (as de- 
fined in paragraph (2)) for the discharge; and 

"(B) the adjustment factor (described in paragraph 
(3)(A)) for the hospital for the fiscal year. 
"(2) Base operating drg payment amount defined. — 

"(A) In general. — Except as provided in subpara- 
graph (B), in this subsection, the term 'base operating 
DRG payment amount' means, with respect to a hospital 
for a fiscal year — 

June 9, 2010 



329 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3025 



"(i) the payment amount that would otherwise be 
made under subsection (d) (determined without regard 
to subsection (o)) for a discharge if this subsection did 
not apply; reduced by 

"(ii) any portion of such payment amount that is 
attributable to payments under paragraphs (5)(A), 
(5)(B), (5)(F), and (12) of subsection (d). 
"(B) Special rules for certain hospitals. — 

"(i) Sole community hospitals and medicare- 
dependent, small rural hospitals. — In the case of 
a medicare-dependent, small rural hospital (with re- 
spect to discharges occurring during fiscal years 2012 
and 2013) or a sole community hospital, in applying 
subparagraph (A)(i), the payment amount that would 
otherwise be made under subsection (d) shall be deter- 
mined without regard to subparagraphs (I) and (L) of 
subsection (b)(3) and subparagraphs (D) and (G) of 
subsection (d)(5). 

"(ii) Hospitals paid under section i8i4. — In the 
case of a hospital that is paid under section 1814(b)(3), 
the Secretary may exempt such hospitals provided 
that States paid under such section submit an annual 
report to the Secretary describing how a similar pro- 
gram in the State for a participating hospital or hos- 
pitals achieves or surpasses the measured results in 
terms of patient health outcomes and cost savings es- 
tablished herein with respect to this section. 
"(3) Adjustment factor. — 

"(A) In general. — For purposes of paragraph (1), the 
adjustment factor under this paragraph for an applicable 
hospital for a fiscal year is equal to the greater of — 

"(i) the ratio described in subparagraph (B) for the 
hospital for the applicable period (as defined in para- 
graph (5)(D)) for such fiscal year; or 

"(ii) the floor adjustment factor specified in sub- 
paragraph (C). 

"(B) Ratio. — The ratio described in this subparagraph 
for a hospital for an applicable period is equal to 1 minus 
the ratio of — 

"(i) the aggregate payments for excess readmis- 
sions (as defined in paragraph (4)(A)) with respect to 
an applicable hospital for the applicable period; and 

"(ii) the aggregate payments for all discharges (as 
defined in paragraph (4)(B)) with respect to such ap- 
plicable hospital for such applicable period. 
"(C) Floor adjustment factor. — For purposes of 
subparagraph (A), the floor adjustment factor specified in 
this subparagraph for — 

"(i) fiscal year 2013 is 0.99; 
"(ii) fiscal year 2014 is 0.98; or 
"(hi) fiscal year 2015 and subsequent fiscal years 
is 0.97. 

"(4) Aggregate payments, excess readmission ratio de- 
fined. — For purposes of this subsection: 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3025 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



330 



"(A) Aggregate payments for excess readmis- 
sions. — The term 'aggregate payments for excess readmis- 
sions' means, for a hospital for an applicable period, the 
sum, for applicable conditions (as defined in paragraph 
(5)(A)), of the product, for each applicable condition, of — 

"(i) the base operating DRG payment amount for 
such hospital for such applicable period for such condi- 
tion; 

"(ii) the number of admissions for such condition 
for such hospital for such applicable period; and 

"(hi) the excess readmissions ratio (as defined in 
subparagraph (C)) for such hospital for such applicable 
period minus 1. 

"(B) Aggregate payments for all discharges. — The 
term 'aggregate payments for all discharges' means, for a 
hospital for an applicable period, the sum of the base oper- 
ating DRG payment amounts for all discharges for all con- 
ditions from such hospital for such applicable period. 
"(C) Excess readmission ratio. — 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), the term 
'excess readmissions ratio' means, with respect to an 
applicable condition for a hospital for an applicable pe- 
riod, the ratio (but not less than 1.0) of — 

"(I) the risk adjusted readmissions based on 
actual readmissions, as determined consistent 
with a readmission measure methodology that has 
been endorsed under paragraph (5)(A)(ii)(I), for an 
applicable hospital for such condition with respect 
to such applicable period; to 

"(II) the risk adjusted expected readmissions 
(as determined consistent with such a method- 
ology) for such hospital for such condition with re- 
spect to such applicable period, 
"(ii) Exclusion of certain readmissions. — For 
purposes of clause (i), with respect to a hospital, ex- 
cess readmissions shall not include readmissions for 
an applicable condition for which there are fewer than 
a minimum number (as determined by the Secretary) 
of discharges for such applicable condition for the ap- 
plicable period and such hospital. 
"(5) Definitions. — For purposes of this subsection: 

"(A) Applicable condition. — The term 'applicable 
condition' means, subject to subparagraph (B), a condition 
or procedure selected by the Secretary among conditions 
and procedures for which — 

"(i) readmissions (as defined in subparagraph (E)) 
that represent conditions or procedures that are high 
volume or high expenditures under this title (or other 
criteria specified by the Secretary); and 
"(ii) measures of such readmissions — 

"(I) have been endorsed by the entity with a 
contract under section 1890(a); and 

"(II) such endorsed measures have exclusions 
for readmissions that are unrelated to the prior 

June 9, 2010 



331 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3025 



discharge (such as a planned readmission or 
transfer to another applicable hospital). 

"(B) Expansion of applicable conditions. — Begin- 
ning with fiscal year 2015, the Secretary shall, to the ex- 
tent practicable, expand the applicable conditions beyond 
the 3 conditions for which measures have been endorsed as 
described in subparagraph (A)(ii)(I) as of the date of the 
enactment of this subsection to the additional 4 conditions 
that have been identified by the Medicare Payment Advi- 
sory Commission in its report to Congress in June 2007 
and to other conditions and procedures as determined ap- 
propriate by the Secretary. In expanding such applicable 
conditions, the Secretary shall seek the endorsement de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A)(ii)(I) but may apply such 
measures without such an endorsement in the case of a 
specified area or medical topic determined appropriate by 
the Secretary for which a feasible and practical measure 
has not been endorsed by the entity with a contract under 
section 1890(a) as long as due consideration is given to 
measures that have been endorsed or adopted by a con- 
sensus organization identified by the Secretary. 

"(C) Applicable hospital. — The term 'applicable hos- 
pital' means a subsection (d) hospital or a hospital that is 
paid under section 1814(b)(3), as the case may be. 

"(D) Applicable period. — The term 'applicable period' 
means, with respect to a fiscal year, such period as the 
Secretary shall specify. 

"(E) Readmission. — The term 'readmission' means, in 
the case of an individual who is discharged from an appli- 
cable hospital, the admission of the individual to the same 
or another applicable hospital within a time period speci- 
fied by the Secretary from the date of such discharge. Inso- 
far as the discharge relates to an applicable condition for 
which there is an endorsed measure described in subpara- 
graph (A)(ii)(I), such time period (such as 30 days) shall be 
consistent with the time period specified for such measure. 
"(6) Reporting hospital specific information. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall make informa- 
tion available to the public regarding readmission rates of 
each subsection (d) hospital under the program. 

"(B) Opportunity to review and submit correc- 
tions. — The Secretary shall ensure that a subsection (d) 
hospital has the opportunity to review, and submit correc- 
tions for, the information to be made public with respect 
to the hospital under subparagraph (A) prior to such infor- 
mation being made public. 

"(C) Website. — Such information shall be posted on 
the Hospital Compare Internet website in an easily under- 
standable format. 

"(7) Limitations on review. — There shall be no adminis- 
trative or judicial review under section 1869, section 1878, or 
otherwise of the following: 

"(A) The determination of base operating DRG pay- 
ment amounts. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3025 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



332 



"(B) The methodology for determining the adjustment 
factor under paragraph (3), including excess readmissions 
ratio under paragraph (4)(C), aggregate payments for ex- 
cess readmissions under paragraph (4)(A), and aggregate 
payments for all discharges under paragraph (4)(B), and 
applicable periods and applicable conditions under para- 
graph (5). 

"(C) The measures of readmissions as described in 
paragraph (5)(A)(ii). 

"(8) Readmission rates for all patients. — 

"(A) Calculation of readmission. — The Secretary 
shall calculate readmission rates for all patients (as de- 
fined in subparagraph (D)) for a specified hospital (as de- 
fined in subparagraph (D)(ii)) for an applicable condition 
(as defined in paragraph (5)(B)) and other conditions 
deemed appropriate by the Secretary for an applicable pe- 
riod (as defined in paragraph (5)(D)) in the same manner 
as used to calculate such readmission rates for hospitals 
with respect to this title and posted on the CMS Hospital 
Compare website. 

"(B) Posting of hospital specific all patient read- 
mission RATES. — The Secretary shall make information on 
all patient readmission rates calculated under subpara- 
graph (A) available on the CMS Hospital Compare website 
in a form and manner determined appropriate by the Sec- 
retary. The Secretary may also make other information de- 
termined appropriate by the Secretary available on such 
website. 

"(C) Hospital submission of all patient data. — 

"(i) Except as provided for in clause (ii), each spec- 
ified hospital (as defined in subparagraph (D)(ii)) shall 
submit to the Secretary, in a form, manner and time 
specified by the Secretary, data and information deter- 
mined necessary by the Secretary for the Secretary to 
calculate the all patient readmission rates described in 
subparagraph (A). 

"(ii) Instead of a specified hospital submitting to 
the Secretary the data and information described in 
clause (i), such data and information may be sub- 
mitted to the Secretary, on behalf of such a specified 
hospital, by a state or an entity determined appro- 
priate by the Secretary. 

"(D) Definitions. — For purposes of this paragraph: 

"(i) The term 'all patients' means patients who are 
treated on an inpatient basis and discharged from a 
specified hospital (as defined in clause (ii)). 

"(ii) The term 'specified hospital' means a sub- 
section (d) hospital, hospitals described in clauses (i) 
through (v) of subsection (d)(1)(B) and, as determined 
feasible and appropriate by the Secretary, other hos- 
pitals not otherwise described in this subparagraph.", 
(b) Quality Improvement. — Part S of title III of the Public 
Health Service Act, as amended by section 3015, is further amend- 
ed by adding at the end the following: 

June 9, 2010 



333 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3026 



"SEC. 399KK [42 U.S.C. 280j-3]. QUALITY IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM FOR 
HOSPITALS WITH A HIGH SEVERITY ADJUSTED READMIS- 
SION RATE. 

"(a) Establishment. — 

"(1) In general. — Not later than 2 years after the date of 
enactment of this section, the Secretary shall make available 
a program for eligible hospitals to improve their readmission 
rates through the use of patient safety organizations (as de- 
fined in section 921(4)). 

"(2) Eligible hospital defined. — In this subsection, the 
term 'eligible hospital' means a hospital that the Secretary de- 
termines has a high rate of risk adjusted readmissions for the 
conditions described in section 1886(q)(8)(A) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act and has not taken appropriate steps to reduce such re- 
admissions and improve patient safety as evidenced through 
historically high rates of readmissions, as determined by the 
Secretary. 

"(3) Risk adjustment. — The Secretary shall utilize appro- 
priate risk adjustment measures to determine eligible hos- 
pitals. 

"(b) Report to the Secretary. — As determined appropriate 
by the Secretary, eligible hospitals and patient safety organizations 
working with those hospitals shall report to the Secretary on the 
processes employed by the hospital to improve readmission rates 
and the impact of such processes on readmission rates.". 

SEC. 3026 [42 U.S.C. 1395b-l note]. COMMUNITY-BASED CARE TRANSI- 
TIONS PROGRAM. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary shall establish a Community- 
Based Care Transitions Program under which the Secretary pro- 
vides funding to eligible entities that furnish improved care transi- 
tion services to high-risk Medicare beneficiaries. 

(b) Definitions. — In this section: 

(1) Eligible entity. — The term "eligible entity" means the 
following: 

(A) A subsection (d) hospital (as defined in section 
1886(d)(1)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395ww(d)(l)(B))) identified by the Secretary as having a 
high readmission rate, such as under section 1886(q) of the 
Social Security Act, as added by section 3025. 

(B) An appropriate community-based organization that 
provides care transition services under this section across 
a continuum of care through arrangements with subsection 
(d) hospitals (as so defined) to furnish the services de- 
scribed in subsection (c)(2)(B)(i) and whose governing body 
includes sufficient representation of multiple health care 
stakeholders (including consumers). 

(2) High-risk medicare beneficiary. — The term "high- 
risk Medicare beneficiary" means a Medicare beneficiary who 
has attained a minimum hierarchical condition category score, 
as determined by the Secretary, based on a diagnosis of mul- 
tiple chronic conditions or other risk factors associated with a 
hospital readmission or substandard transition into post-hos- 
pitalization care, which may include 1 or more of the following: 

(A) Cognitive impairment. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3026 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



334 



(B) Depression. 

(C) A history of multiple readmissions. 

(D) Any other chronic disease or risk factor as deter- 
mined by the Secretary. 

(3) Medicare beneficiary. — The term "Medicare bene- 
ficiary" means an individual who is entitled to benefits under 
part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 
et seq.) and enrolled under part B of such title, but not en- 
rolled under part C of such title. 

(4) Program. — The term "program" means the program 
conducted under this section. 

(5) Read-mission. — The term "readmission" has the mean- 
ing given such term in section 1886(q)(5)(E) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act, as added by section 3025. 

(6) Secretary. — The term "Secretary" means the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services. 

(c) Requirements. — 

(1) Duration. — 

(A) In general. — The program shall be conducted for 
a 5-year period, beginning January 1, 2011. 

(B) Expansion. — The Secretary may expand the dura- 
tion and the scope of the program, to the extent deter- 
mined appropriate by the Secretary, if the Secretary deter- 
mines (and the Chief Actuary of the Centers for Medicare 
&amp; Medicaid Services, with respect to spending under this 
title, certifies) that such expansion would reduce spending 
under this title without reducing quality. 

(2) Application; participation. — 

(A) In general. — 

(i) Application. — An eligible entity seeking to 
participate in the program shall submit an application 
to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and 
containing such information as the Secretary may re- 
quire. 

(ii) Partnership. — If an eligible entity is a hos- 
pital, such hospital shall enter into a partnership with 
a community-based organization to participate in the 
program. 

(B) Intervention proposal. — Subject to subpara- 
graph (C), an application submitted under subparagraph 
(A)(i) shall include a detailed proposal for at least 1 care 
transition intervention, which may include the following: 

(i) Initiating care transition services for a high- 
risk Medicare beneficiary not later than 24 hours prior 
to the discharge of the beneficiary from the eligible en- 
tity. 

(ii) Arranging timely post-discharge follow-up 
services to the high-risk Medicare beneficiary to pro- 
vide the beneficiary (and, as appropriate, the primary 
caregiver of the beneficiary) with information regard- 
ing responding to symptoms that may indicate addi- 
tional health problems or a deteriorating condition. 

(iii) Providing the high-risk Medicare beneficiary 
(and, as appropriate, the primary caregiver of the ben- 
June 9, 2010 



335 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3027 



eficiary) with assistance to ensure productive and 
timely interactions between patients and post-acute 
and outpatient providers. 

(iv) Assessing and actively engaging with a high- 
risk Medicare beneficiary (and, as appropriate, the pri- 
mary caregiver of the beneficiary) through the provi- 
sion of self-management support and relevant infor- 
mation that is specific to the beneficiary's condition. 

(v) Conducting comprehensive medication review 
and management (including, if appropriate, counseling 
and self-management support). 

(C) Limitation. — A care transition intervention pro- 
posed under subparagraph (B) may not include payment 
for services required under the discharge planning process 
described in section 1861(ee) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395x(ee)). 

(3) Selection. — In selecting eligible entities to participate 
in the program, the Secretary shall give priority to eligible en- 
tities that — 

(A) participate in a program administered by the Ad- 
ministration on Aging to provide concurrent care transi- 
tions interventions with multiple hospitals and practi- 
tioners; or 

(B) provide services to medically underserved popu- 
lations, small communities, and rural areas. 

(d) Implementation. — Notwithstanding any other provision of 
law, the Secretary may implement the provisions of this section by 
program instruction or otherwise. 

(e) Waiver Authority. — The Secretary may waive such re- 
quirements of titles XI and XVIII of the Social Security Act as may 
be necessary to carry out the program. 

(f) Funding. — For purposes of carrying out this section, the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide for the 
transfer, from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under 
section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i) and the 
Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund under sec- 
tion 1841 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395t), in such proportion as the 
Secretary determines appropriate, of $500,000,000, to the Centers 
for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services Program Management Account 
for the period of fiscal years 2011 through 2015. Amounts trans- 
ferred under the preceding sentence shall remain available until 
expended. 

SEC. 3027. EXTENSION OF GAINSHARING DEMONSTRATION. 

(a) In General. — Subsection (d)(3) of section 5007 of the Def- 
icit Reduction Act of 2005 (Public Law 109-171) is amended by in- 
serting "(or September 30, 2011, in the case of a demonstration 
project in operation as of October 1, 2008)" after "December 31, 
2009". 

(b) Funding. — 

(1) In general. — Subsection (f)(1) of such section is 
amended by inserting "and for fiscal year 2010, $1,600,000," 
after "$6,000,000,". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3101 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



336 



(2) Availability. — Subsection (f)(2) of such section is 
amended by striking "2010" and inserting "2014 or until ex- 
pended", 
(c) Reports. — 

(1) Quality improvement and savings. — Subsection (e)(3) 
of such section is amended by striking "December 1, 2008" and 
inserting "March 31, 2011". 

(2) Final report. — Subsection (e)(4) of such section is 
amended by striking "May 1, 2010" and inserting "March 31, 
2013". 

Subtitle B — Improving Medicare for 
Patients and Providers 

PART I— ENSURING BENEFICIARY ACCESS TO 
PHYSICIAN CARE AND OTHER SERVICES 

SEC. 3101. [INCREASE IN THE PHYSICIAN PAYMENT UP- 
DATE] [REPEALED]. 

[This section (and amendment made by this section) repealed 
by section 10310. The repeal did not redesignate subsequent sec- 
tions. ] 

SEC. 3102. EXTENSION OF THE WORK GEOGRAPHIC INDEX FLOOR AND 
REVISIONS TO THE PRACTICE EXPENSE GEOGRAPHIC AD- 
JUSTMENT UNDER THE MEDICARE PHYSICIAN FEE 
SCHEDULE. 

(a) Extension of Work GPCI Floor.— Section 1848(e)(1)(E) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(e)(l)(E)) is amended by 
striking "before January 1, 2010" and inserting "before January 1, 
2011". 

(b) Practice Expense Geographic Adjustment for 2010 and 
Subsequent Years. — Section 1848(e)(1) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w4(e)(l)) is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (A), by striking "and (G)" and insert- 
ing "(G), and (H)"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: 

"(H) Practice expense geographic adjustment for 

2010 AND SUBSEQUENT YEARS. — 

"(i) For 2010. — Subject to clause (hi), for services 
furnished during 2010, the employee wage and rent 
portions of the practice expense geographic index de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A)(i) shall reflect Vss of the 
difference between the relative costs of employee 
wages and rents in each of the different fee schedule 
areas and the national average of such employee 
wages and rents. [As revised by section 1108 of 
HCERA] 

"(ii) For 2011. — Subject to clause (hi), for services 
furnished during 2011, the employee wage and rent 
portions of the practice expense geographic index de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A)(i) shall reflect Yz of the 
difference between the relative costs of employee 
wages and rents in each of the different fee schedule 

June 9, 2010 



337 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3102 



areas and the national average of such employee 
wages and rents. 

"(hi) Hold harmless. — The practice expense por- 
tion of the geographic adjustment factor applied in a 
fee schedule area for services furnished in 2010 or 
2011 shall not, as a result of the application of clause 
(i) or (ii), be reduced below the practice expense por- 
tion of the geographic adjustment factor under sub- 
paragraph (A)(i) (as calculated prior to the application 
of such clause (i) or (ii), respectively) for such area for 
such year. 

"(iv) Analysis. — The Secretary shall analyze cur- 
rent methods of establishing practice expense geo- 
graphic adjustments under subparagraph (A)(i) and 
evaluate data that fairly and reliably establishes dis- 
tinctions in the costs of operating a medical practice in 
the different fee schedule areas. Such analysis shall 
include an evaluation of the following: 

"(I) The feasibility of using actual data or reli- 
able survey data developed by medical organiza- 
tions on the costs of operating a medical practice, 
including office rents and non-physician staff 
wages, in different fee schedule areas. 

"(II) The office expense portion of the practice 
expense geographic adjustment described in sub- 
paragraph (A)(i), including the extent to which 
types of office expenses are determined in local 
markets instead of national markets. 

"(Ill) The weights assigned to each of the cat- 
egories within the practice expense geographic ad- 
justment described in subparagraph (A)(i). 
"(v) Revision for 2012 and subsequent years. — 
As a result of the analysis described in clause (iv), the 
Secretary shall, not later than January 1, 2012, make 
appropriate adjustments to the practice expense geo- 
graphic adjustment described in subparagraph (A)(i) to 
ensure accurate geographic adjustments across fee 
schedule areas, including — 

"(I) basing the office rents component and its 
weight on office expenses that vary among fee 
schedule areas; and 

"(II) considering a representative range of pro- 
fessional and non-professional personnel employed 
in a medical office based on the use of the Amer- 
ican Community Survey data or other reliable 
data for wage adjustments. 
Such adjustments shall be made without regard to ad- 
justments made pursuant to clauses (i) and (ii) and 
shall be made in a budget neutral manner.". 
[Section 10324(c) of PPACA, p. 869, provided for amendments 
to section 1848(e)(1) of Social Security Act providing a floor on prac- 
tice expense index for services in frontier States. ] 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3103 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



338 



SEC. 3103. EXTENSION OF EXCEPTIONS PROCESS FOR MEDICARE 
THERAPY CAPS. 

Section 1833(g)(5) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
13951(g)(5)) is amended by striking "December 31, 2009" and in- 
serting "December 31, 2010". 

SEC. 3104. EXTENSION OF PAYMENT FOR TECHNICAL COMPONENT OF 
CERTAIN PHYSICIAN PATHOLOGY SERVICES. 

Section 542(c) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Benefits 
Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (as enacted into law by 
section 1(a)(6) of Public Law 106-554), as amended by section 732 
of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Moderniza- 
tion Act of 2003 (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4 note), section 104 of division 
B of the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006 (42 U.S.C. 1395w- 
4 note), section 104 of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Exten- 
sion Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-173), and section 136 of the 
Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 
(Public Law 110-275), is amended by striking "and 2009" and in- 
serting "2009, and 2010". 

SEC. 3105. EXTENSION OF AMBULANCE ADD-ONS. 

(a) Ground Ambulance. — Section 1834(1)(13)(A) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(l)(13)(A)) is amended— [As would be 
revised by section 10311(a)~\ 

(1) in the matter preceding clause (i), by striking "2010" 
and inserting "2011"; and 

(2) in each of clauses (i) and (ii), by striking "January 1, 
2010" and inserting "January 1, 2011" each place it appears. 

(b) Air Ambulance. — Section 146(b)(1) of the Medicare Im- 
provements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 (Public Law 
110-275) is amended [As would be revised by section 10311(b)~\ by 
striking "December 31, 2009" and inserting "December 31, 2010". 

(c) Super Rural Ambulance. — Section 1834(1)(12)(A) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(l)(12)(A)) is amended [As 
would be revised by section 10311(cj\ by striking "2010" and insert- 
ing "2011". 

SEC. 3106. EXTENSION OF CERTAIN PAYMENT RULES FOR LONG-TERM 
CARE HOSPITAL SERVICES AND OF MORATORIUM ON THE 
ESTABLISHMENT OF CERTAIN HOSPITALS AND FACILI- 
TIES. 

(a) Extension of Certain Payment Rules. — Section 114(c) of 
the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 (42 
U.S.C. 1395ww note), as amended by section 4302(a) of the Amer- 
ican Recovery and Reinvestment Act (Public Law 111-5), is further 
amended by striking "3-year period" each place it appears and in- 
serting "5-year period". [As revised by section 10312(a)~\ 

(b) Extension of Moratorium. — Section 114(d)(1) of such Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395ww note), in the matter preceding subparagraph 
(A), is amended by striking "3-year period" and inserting "5-year 
period". [As revised by section 10312(b)~\ 

SEC. 3107. EXTENSION OF PHYSICIAN FEE SCHEDULE MENTAL 
HEALTH ADD-ON. 

Section 138(a)(1) of the Medicare Improvements for Patients 
and Providers Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-275) is amended by 
striking "December 31, 2009" and inserting "December 31, 2010". 

June 9, 2010 



339 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3109 



SEC. 3108. PERMITTING PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS TO ORDER POST-HOS- 
PITAL EXTENDED CARE SERVICES. 

(a) Ordering Post-Hospital Extended Care Services. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1814(a)(2) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395fla)(2)), in the matter preceding subpara- 
graph (A), is amended by striking "or clinical nurse specialist" 
and inserting ", a clinical nurse specialist, or a physician as- 
sistant (as those terms are defined in section 1861(aa)(5))" 
after "nurse practitioner". 

(2) Conforming amendment. — Section 1814(a) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f(a)) is amended, in the second 
sentence, by striking "or clinical nurse specialist" and inserting 
"clinical nurse specialist, or physician assistant" after "nurse 
practitioner,". 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to items and services furnished on or after January 1, 
2011. 

SEC. 3109. EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN PHARMACIES FROM ACCREDITA- 
TION REQUIREMENTS. 

(a) In General. — Section 1834(a)(20) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(20)), as added by section 154(b)(1)(A) of the 
Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 
(Public Law 100-275), is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (F)(i) — 

(A) by inserting "and subparagraph (G)" after "clause 
(ii)"; and 

(B) by inserting ", except that the Secretary shall not 
require a pharmacy to have submitted to the Secretary 
such evidence of accreditation prior to January 1, 2011" 
before the semicolon at the end; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: 

"(G) Application of accreditation requirement to 

CERTAIN PHARMACIES. — 

"(i) In general. — With respect to items and serv- 
ices furnished on or after January 1, 2011, in imple- 
menting quality standards under this paragraph — 

"(I) subject to subclause (II), in applying such 
standards and the accreditation requirement of 
subparagraph (F)(i) with respect to pharmacies 
described in clause (ii) furnishing such items and 
services, such standards and accreditation re- 
quirement shall not apply to such pharmacies; 
and 

"(II) the Secretary may apply to such phar- 
macies an alternative accreditation requirement 
established by the Secretary if the Secretary de- 
termines such alternative accreditation require- 
ment is more appropriate for such pharmacies, 
"(ii) Pharmacies described. — A pharmacy de- 
scribed in this clause is a pharmacy that meets each 
of the following criteria: 

"(I) The total billings by the pharmacy for 
such items and services under this title are less 
than 5 percent of total pharmacy sales, as deter- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3110 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



340 



mined based on the average total pharmacy sales 
for the previous 3 calendar years, 3 fiscal years, or 
other yearly period specified by the Secretary. 

"(II) The pharmacy has been enrolled under 
section 1866(j) as a supplier of durable medical 
equipment, prosthetics, orthotics, and supplies, 
has been issued (which may include the renewal 
of) a provider number for at least 5 years, and for 
which a final adverse action (as defined in section 
424.57(a) of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations) 
has not been imposed in the past 5 years. 

"(Ill) The pharmacy submits to the Secretary 
an attestation, in a form and manner, and at a 
time, specified by the Secretary, that the phar- 
macy meets the criteria described in subclauses (I) 
and (II). Such attestation shall be subject to sec- 
tion 1001 of title 18, United States Code. 

"(IV) The pharmacy agrees to submit mate- 
rials as requested by the Secretary, or during the 
course of an audit conducted on a random sample 
of pharmacies selected annually, to verify that the 
pharmacy meets the criteria described in sub- 
clauses (I) and (II). Materials submitted under the 
preceding sentence shall include a certification by 
an accountant on behalf of the pharmacy or the 
submission of tax returns filed by the pharmacy 
during the relevant periods, as requested by the 
Secretary.". 

(b) Administration. — Notwithstanding any other provision of 
law, the Secretary may implement the amendments made by sub- 
section (a) by program instruction or otherwise. 

(c) Rule of Construction. — Nothing in the provisions of or 
amendments made by this section shall be construed as affecting 
the application of an accreditation requirement for pharmacies to 
qualify for bidding in a competitive acquisition area under section 
1847 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-3). 

SEC. 3110. PART B SPECIAL ENROLLMENT PERIOD FOR DISABLED 
TRICARE BENEFICIARIES. 

(a) In General. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1837 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395p) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new subsection: 

"(1)(1) In the case of any individual who is a covered bene- 
ficiary (as defined in section 1072(5) of title 10, United States 
Code) at the time the individual is entitled to part A under section 
226(b) or section 226A and who is eligible to enroll but who has 
elected not to enroll (or to be deemed enrolled) during the individ- 
ual's initial enrollment period, there shall be a special enrollment 
period described in paragraph (2). 

"(2) The special enrollment period described in this paragraph, 
with respect to an individual, is the 12-month period beginning on 
the day after the last day of the initial enrollment period of the in- 
dividual or, if later, the 12-month period beginning with the month 
the individual is notified of enrollment under this section. 

June 9, 2010 



341 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3111 



"(3) In the case of an individual who enrolls during the special 
enrollment period provided under paragraph (1), the coverage pe- 
riod under this part shall begin on the first day of the month in 
which the individual enrolls, or, at the option of the individual, the 
first month after the end of the individual's initial enrollment pe- 
riod. 

"(4) An individual may only enroll during the special enroll- 
ment period provided under paragraph (1) one time during the in- 
dividual's lifetime. 

"(5) The Secretary shall ensure that the materials relating to 
coverage under this part that are provided to an individual de- 
scribed in paragraph (1) prior to the individual's initial enrollment 
period contain information concerning the impact of not enrolling 
under this part, including the impact on health care benefits under 
the TRICARE program under chapter 55 of title 10, United States 
Code. 

"(6) The Secretary of Defense shall collaborate with the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services and the Commissioner of So- 
cial Security to provide for the accurate identification of individuals 
described in paragraph (1). The Secretary of Defense shall provide 
such individuals with notification with respect to this subsection. 
The Secretary of Defense shall collaborate with the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services and the Commissioner of Social Secu- 
rity to ensure appropriate follow up pursuant to any notification 
provided under the preceding sentence.". 

(2) Effective date. — The amendment made by paragraph 
(1) shall apply to elections made with respect to initial enroll- 
ment periods that end after the date of the enactment of this 
Act. 

(b) Waiver of Increase of Premium. — Section 1839(b) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395r(b)) is amended by striking 
"section 1837(i)(4)" and inserting "subsection (i)(4) or (1) of section 
1837". 

SEC. 3111. PAYMENT FOR BONE DENSITY TESTS. 

(a) Payment. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1848 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-4) is amended— 
(A) in subsection (b) — 

(i) in paragraph (4)(B), by inserting ", and for 
2010 and 2011, dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry serv- 
ices (as described in paragraph (6))" before the period 
at the end; and 

(ii) by adding at the end the following new para- 
graph: 

"(6) Treatment of bone mass scans. — For dual-energy x- 
ray absorptiometry services (identified in 2006 by HCPCS 
codes 76075 and 76077 (and any succeeding codes)) furnished 
during 2010 and 2011, instead of the payment amount that 
would otherwise be determined under this section for such 
years, the payment amount shall be equal to 70 percent of the 
product of — 

"(A) the relative value for the service (as determined 
in subsection (c)(2)) for 2006; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3112 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



342 



"(B) the conversion factor (established under sub- 
section (d)) for 2006; and 

"(C) the geographic adjustment factor (established 
under subsection (e)(2)) for the service for the fee schedule 
area for 2010 and 2011, respectively."; and 

(B) in subsection (c)(2)(B)(iv)— 

(i) in subclause (II), by striking "and" at the end; 

(ii) in subclause (III), by striking the period at the 
end and inserting "; and"; and 

(iii) by adding at the end the following new sub- 
clause: 

"(IV) subsection (b)(6) shall not be taken into 
account in applying clause (ii)(II) for 2010 or 
2011.". 

(2) Implementation. — Notwithstanding any other provi- 
sion of law, the Secretary may implement the amendments 
made by paragraph (1) by program instruction or otherwise, 
(b) Study and Report by the Institute of Medicine. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services is authorized to enter into an agreement with the In- 
stitute of Medicine of the National Academies to conduct a 
study on the ramifications of Medicare payment reductions for 
dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (as described in section 
1848(b)(6) of the Social Security Act, as added by subsection 
(a)(1)) during 2007, 2008, and 2009 on beneficiary access to 
bone mass density tests. 

(2) Report. — An agreement entered into under paragraph 
(1) shall provide for the Institute of Medicine to submit to the 
Secretary and to Congress a report containing the results of 
the study conducted under such paragraph. 

SEC. 3112. REVISION TO THE MEDICARE IMPROVEMENT FUND. 

Section 1898(b)(1)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395iii) is amended by striking "$22,290,000,000" and inserting 
"$0". 

SEC. 3113 [42 U.S.C. 13951 note]. TREATMENT OF CERTAIN COMPLEX DI- 
AGNOSTIC LABORATORY TESTS. 

(a) Demonstration Project. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services (in this section referred to as the "Secretary") shall 
conduct a demonstration project under part B title XVIII of the 
Social Security Act under which separate payments are made 
under such part for complex diagnostic laboratory tests pro- 
vided to individuals under such part. Under the demonstration 
project, the Secretary shall establish appropriate payment 
rates for such tests. 

(2) Covered complex diagnostic laboratory test de- 
fined. — In this section, the term "complex diagnostic labora- 
tory test" means a diagnostic laboratory test — 

(A) that is an analysis of gene protein expression, 
topographic genotyping, or a cancer chemotherapy sensi- 
tivity assay; 

June 9, 2010 



343 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3114 



(B) that is determined by the Secretary to be a labora- 
tory test for which there is not an alternative test having 
equivalent performance characteristics; 

(C) which is billed using a Health Care Procedure Cod- 
ing System (HCPCS) code other than a not otherwise clas- 
sified code under such Coding System; 

(D) which is approved or cleared by the Food and Drug 
Administration or is covered under title XVIII of the Social 
Security Act; and 

(E) is described in section 1861(s)(3) of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(s)(3)). 

(3) Separate payment defined. — In this section, the term 
"separate payment" means direct payment to a laboratory (in- 
cluding a hospital-based or independent laboratory) that per- 
forms a complex diagnostic laboratory test with respect to a 
specimen collected from an individual during a period in which 
the individual is a patient of a hospital if the test is performed 
after such period of hospitalization and if separate payment 
would not otherwise be made under title XVIII of the Social 
Security Act by reason of sections 1862(a)(14) and 
1866(a)(l)(H)(i) of the such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)(14); 42 
U.S.C. 1395cc(a)(l)(H)(i)). 

(b) Duration. — Subject to subsection (c)(2), the Secretary shall 
conduct the demonstration project under this section for the 2-year 
period beginning on July 1, 2011. 

(c) Payments and Limitation. — Payments under the dem- 
onstration project under this section shall — 

(1) be made from the Federal Supplemental Medical Insur- 
ance Trust Fund under section 1841 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395t); and 

(2) may not exceed $100,000,000. 

(d) Report. — Not later than 2 years after the completion of the 
demonstration project under this section, the Secretary shall sub- 
mit to Congress a report on the project. Such report shall include — 

(1) an assessment of the impact of the demonstration 
project on access to care, quality of care, health outcomes, and 
expenditures under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (in- 
cluding any savings under such title); and 

(2) such recommendations as the Secretary determines ap- 
propriate. 

(e) Implementation Funding. — For purposes of administering 
this section (including preparing and submitting the report under 
subsection (d)), the Secretary shall provide for the transfer, from 
the Federal Supplemental Medical Insurance Trust Fund under 
section 1841 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395t), to the 
Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services Program Management 
Account, of $5,000,000. Amounts transferred under the preceding 
sentence shall remain available until expended. 

SEC. 3114. IMPROVED ACCESS FOR CERTIFIED NURSE-MIDWIFE SERV- 
ICES. 

Section 1833(a)(l)(K) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
13951(a)(l)(K)) is amended by inserting "(or 100 percent for services 
furnished on or after January 1, 2011)" after "1992, 65 percent". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3121 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



344 



PART II— RURAL PROTECTIONS 

SEC. 3121. EXTENSION OF OUTPATIENT HOLD HARMLESS PROVISION. 

(a) In General.— Section 1833(t)(7)(D)(i) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 13951(t)(7)(D)(i)) is amended— 

(1) in subclause (II) — 

(A) in the first sentence, by striking "2010"and insert- 
ing "2011"; and 

(B) in the second sentence, by striking "or 2009" and 
inserting ", 2009, or 2010"; and 

(2) in subclause (III), by striking "January 1, 2010" and in- 
serting "January 1, 2011". 

(b) Permitting All Sole Community Hospitals To Be Eligi- 
ble for Hold Harmless. — Section 1833(t)(7)(D)(i)(III) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 13951(t)(7)(D)(i)(III)) is amended by adding 
at the end the following new sentence: "In the case of covered OPD 
services furnished on or after January 1, 2010, and before January 
1, 2011, the preceding sentence shall be applied without regard to 
the 100-bed limitation.". 

SEC. 3122. EXTENSION OF MEDICARE REASONABLE COSTS PAYMENTS 
FOR CERTAIN CLINICAL DIAGNOSTIC LABORATORY 
TESTS FURNISHED TO HOSPITAL PATIENTS IN CERTAIN 
RURAL AREAS. 

Section 416(b) of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improve- 
ment, and Modernization Act of 2003 (42 U.S.C. 13951-4), as 
amended by section 105 of division B of the Tax Relief and Health 
Care Act of 2006 (42 U.S.C. 13951 note) and section 107 of the 
Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 (42 U.S.C. 
13951 note), is amended by inserting "or during the 1-year period 
beginning on July 1, 2010" before the period at the end. 

SEC. 3123. EXTENSION OF THE RURAL COMMUNITY HOSPITAL DEM- 
ONSTRATION PROGRAM. 

(a) One-year Extension. — Section 410A of the Medicare Pre- 
scription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Pub- 
lic Law 108-173; 117 Stat. 2272) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new subsection: 

"(g) Five-Year Extension of Demonstration Program. — 
[Replaced by section 10313(a)~\ 

"(1) In general. — Subject to the succeeding provisions of 
this subsection, the Secretary shall conduct the demonstration 
program under this section for an additional 5-year period (in 
this section referred to as the '5-year extension period') that be- 
gins on the date immediately following the last day of the ini- 
tial 5-year period under subsection (a)(5). 

"(2) Expansion of demonstration states. — Notwith- 
standing subsection (a)(2), during the 5-year extension period, 
the Secretary shall expand the number of States with low pop- 
ulation densities determined by the Secretary under such sub- 
section to 20. In determining which States to include in such 
expansion, the Secretary shall use the same criteria and data 
that the Secretary used to determine the States under such 
subsection for purposes of the initial 5-year period. 

"(3) Increase in maximum number of hospitals partici- 
pating in the demonstration program. — Notwithstanding 

June 9, 2010 



345 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3124 



subsection (a)(4), during the 5-year extension period, not more 
than 30 rural community hospitals may participate in the dem- 
onstration program under this section. 

"(4) Hospitals in demonstration program on date of 
enactment. — In the case of a rural community hospital that is 
participating in the demonstration program under this section 
as of the last day of the initial 5-year period, the Secretary — 
"(A) shall provide for the continued participation of 
such rural community hospital in the demonstration pro- 
gram during the 5-year extension period unless the rural 
community hospital makes an election, in such form and 
manner as the Secretary may specify, to discontinue such 
participation; and 

"(B) in calculating the amount of payment under sub- 
section (b) to the rural community hospital for covered in- 
patient hospital services furnished by the hospital during 
such 5-year extension period, shall substitute, under para- 
graph (1)(A) of such subsection — 

"(i) the reasonable costs of providing such services 
for discharges occurring in the first cost reporting pe- 
riod beginning on or after the first day of the 5-year 
extension period, for 

"(ii) the reasonable costs of providing such serv- 
ices for discharges occurring in the first cost reporting 
period beginning on or after the implementation of the 
demonstration program.". 

(b) Conforming Amendments. — Subsection (a)(5) of section 
410A of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Mod- 
ernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173; 117 Stat. 2272) is 
amended by inserting "(in this section referred to as the 'initial 5- 
year period') and, as provided in subsection (g), for the 5-year ex- 
tension period" after "5-year period". [As revised by section 
10313(b)] 

(c) Technical Amendments. — 

(1) Subsection (b) of section 410A of the Medicare Prescrip- 
tion Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Pub- 
lic Law 108-173; 117 Stat. 2272) is amended— 

(A) in paragraph (l)(B)(ii), by striking "2)" and insert- 
ing "2))"; and 

(B) in paragraph (2), by inserting "cost" before "report- 
ing period" the first place such term appears in each of 
subparagraphs (A) and (B). 

(2) Subsection (f)(1) of section 410A of the Medicare Pre- 
scription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 
(Public Law 108-173; 117 Stat. 2272) is amended— 

(A) in subparagraph (A)(ii), by striking "paragraph (2)" 
and inserting "subparagraph (B)"; and 

(B) in subparagraph (B), by striking "paragraph 
(1)(B)" and inserting "subparagraph (A)(ii)". 

SEC. 3124. EXTENSION OF THE MEDICARE-DEPENDENT HOSPITAL 
(MDH) PROGRAM. 

(a) Extension of Payment Methodology. — Section 
1886(d)(5)(G) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(G)) 
is amended — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3125 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



346 



(1) in clause (i), by striking "October 1, 2011" and inserting 
"October 1, 2012"; and 

(2) in clause (ii)QI), by striking "October 1, 2011" and in- 
serting "October 1, 2012". 

(b) Conforming Amendments. — 

(1) Extension of target amount. — Section 1886(b)(3)(D) 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(b)(3)(D)) is 
amended — 

(A) in the matter preceding clause (i), by striking "Oc- 
tober 1, 2011" and inserting "October 1, 2012"; and 

(B) in clause (iv), by striking "through fiscal year 
2011" and inserting "through fiscal year 2012". 

(2) Permitting hospitals to decline reclassifica- 
tion. — Section 13501(e)(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconcili- 
ation Act of 1993 (42 U.S.C. 1395ww note) is amended by strik- 
ing "through fiscal year 2011" and inserting "through fiscal 
year 2012". 

SEC. 3125. TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENTS TO THE MEDICARE INPA- 
TIENT HOSPITAL PAYMENT ADJUSTMENT FOR LOW-VOL- 
UME HOSPITALS. 

Section 1886(d)(12) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395ww(d)(12)) is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (A), by inserting "or (D)" after "sub- 
paragraph (B)"; 

(2) in subparagraph (B), in the matter preceding clause (i), 
by striking "The Secretary" and inserting "For discharges oc- 
curring in fiscal years 2005 through 2010 and for discharges 
occurring in fiscal year 2013 and subsequent fiscal years, the 
Secretary"; 

(3) in subparagraph (C)(i) — 

(A) by inserting "(or, with respect to fiscal years 2011 
and 2012, 15 road miles)" after "25 road miles"; and 

(B) by inserting "(or, with respect to fiscal years 2011 
and 2012, 1,600 discharges of individuals entitled to, or en- 
rolled for, benefits under part A)" after "800 discharges"; 
and [As revised by section 10314(1)~\ 

(4) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: 

"(D) Temporary applicable percentage increase. — 
For discharges occurring in fiscal years 2011 and 2012, the 
Secretary shall determine an applicable percentage in- 
crease for purposes of subparagraph (A) using a continuous 
linear sliding scale ranging from 25 percent for low-volume 
hospitals with 200 or fewer discharges of individuals enti- 
tled to, or enrolled for, benefits under part A in the fiscal 
year to percent for low-volume hospitals with greater 
than 1,600 discharges of such individuals in the fiscal 
year. [As revised by section 10314(2)Y '. 

SEC. 3126. IMPROVEMENTS TO THE DEMONSTRATION PROJECT ON 
COMMUNITY HEALTH INTEGRATION MODELS IN CERTAIN 
RURAL COUNTIES. 

(a) Removal of Limitation on Number of Eligible Coun- 
ties Selected. — Subsection (d)(3) of section 123 of the Medicare 
Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 (42 U.S.C. 
1395i-4 note) is amended by striking "not more than 6". 

June 9, 2010 



347 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3129 



(b) Removal of References to Rural Health Clinic Serv- 
ices and Inclusion of Physicians' Services in Scope of Dem- 
onstration Project. — Such section 123 is amended — 

(1) in subsection (d)(4)(B)(i)(3), by striking subclause (III); 

and 

(2) in subsection (j) — 

(A) in paragraph (8), by striking subparagraph (B) and 
inserting the following: 

"(B) Physicians' services (as defined in section 1861(q) 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(q))."; 

(B) by striking paragraph (9); and 

(C) by redesignating paragraph (10) as paragraph (9). 

SEC. 3127. MEDPAC STUDY ON ADEQUACY OF MEDICARE PAYMENTS 
FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS SERVING IN RURAL 
AREAS. 

(a) Study. — The Medicare Payment Advisory Commission shall 
conduct a study on the adequacy of payments for items and serv- 
ices furnished by providers of services and suppliers in rural areas 
under the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.). Such study shall include an anal- 
ysis of — 

(1) any adjustments in payments to providers of services 
and suppliers that furnish items and services in rural areas; 

(2) access by Medicare beneficiaries to items and services 
in rural areas; 

(3) the adequacy of payments to providers of services and 
suppliers that furnish items and services in rural areas; and 

(4) the quality of care furnished in rural areas. 

(b) Report. — Not later than January 1, 2011, the Medicare 
Payment Advisory Commission shall submit to Congress a report 
containing the results of the study conducted under subsection (a). 
Such report shall include recommendations on appropriate modi- 
fications to any adjustments in payments to providers of services 
and suppliers that furnish items and services in rural areas, to- 
gether with recommendations for such legislation and administra- 
tive action as the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission deter- 
mines appropriate. 

SEC. 3128. TECHNICAL CORRECTION RELATED TO CRITICAL ACCESS 
HOSPITAL SERVICES. 

(a) In General. — Subsections (g)(2)(A) and (1X8) of section 
1834 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m) are each amend- 
ed by inserting "101 percent of before "the reasonable costs". 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendments made by subsection (a) 
shall take effect as if included in the enactment of section 405(a) 
of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Moderniza- 
tion Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173; 117 Stat. 2266). 

SEC. 3129. EXTENSION OF AND REVISIONS TO MEDICARE RURAL HOS- 
PITAL FLEXIBILITY PROGRAM. 

(a) Authorization. — Section 1820(j) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395i-4(j)) is amended— 

(1) by striking "2010, and for" and inserting "2010, for"; 

and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3131 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



348 



(2) by inserting "and for making grants to all States under 
subsection (g), such sums as may be necessary in each of fiscal 
years 2011 and 2012, to remain available until expended" be- 
fore the period at the end. 

(b) Use of Funds.— Section 1820(g)(3) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-4(g)(3)) is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (A), by inserting "and to assist such 
hospitals in participating in delivery system reforms under the 
provisions of and amendments made by the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act, such as value-based purchasing pro- 
grams, accountable care organizations under section 1899, the 
National pilot program on payment bundling under section 
1866D, and other delivery system reform programs determined 
appropriate by the Secretary" before the period at the end; and 

(2) in subparagraph (E) — 

(A) by striking ", and to offset" and inserting ", to off- 
set"; and 

(B) by inserting "and to participate in delivery system 
reforms under the provisions of and amendments made by 
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, such as 
value-based purchasing programs, accountable care organi- 
zations under section 1899, the National pilot program on 
payment bundling under section 1866D, and other delivery 
system reform programs determined appropriate by the 
Secretary" before the period at the end. 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to grants made on or after January 1, 2010. 

[Section 10324(a) of PPACA, p. 868, amended section 
1886(d)(3)(E) of the Social Security Act to add a floor on the area 
wage index for hospitals in frontier States} 

PART III— IMPROVING PAYMENT ACCURACY 

SEC. 3131. PAYMENT ADJUSTMENTS FOR HOME HEALTH CARE. 

(a) Rebasing Home Health Prospective Payment 
Amount. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1895(b)(3)(A) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395fff(b)(3)(A)) is amended— 

(A) in clause (i)(III), by striking "For periods" and in- 
serting "Subject to clause (iii), for periods"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new clause: [As 
revised by section 10315(a)~\ 

"(iii) Adjustment for 2014 and subsequent 
years. — 

"(I) In general. — Subject to subclause (II), for 
2014 and subsequent years, the amount (or 
amounts) that would otherwise be applicable 
under clause (i)(III) shall be adjusted by a per- 
centage determined appropriate by the Secretary 
to reflect such factors as changes in the number of 
visits in an episode, the mix of services in an epi- 
sode, the level of intensity of services in an epi- 
sode, the average cost of providing care per epi- 
sode, and other factors that the Secretary con- 
June 9, 2010 



349 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3131 



siders to be relevant. In conducting the analysis 
under the preceding sentence, the Secretary may 
consider differences between hospital-based and 
freestanding agencies, between for-profit and non- 
profit agencies, and between the resource costs of 
urban and rural agencies. Such adjustment shall 
be made before the update under subparagraph 
(B) is applied for the year. 

"(II) Transition. — The Secretary shall pro- 
vide for a 4-year phase-in (in equal increments) of 
the adjustment under subclause (I), with such ad- 
justment being fully implemented for 2017. Dur- 
ing each year of such phase-in, the amount of any 
adjustment under subclause (I) for the year may 
not exceed 3.5 percent of the amount (or amounts) 
applicable under clause (i)(III) as of the date of 
enactment of the Patient Protection and Afford- 
able Care Act.". 
(2) MedPAC study and report. — 

(A) Study. — The Medicare Payment Advisory Commis- 
sion shall conduct a study on the implementation of the 
amendments made by paragraph (1). Such study shall in- 
clude an analysis of the impact of such amendments on — 

(i) access to care; 

(ii) quality outcomes; 

(iii) the number of home health agencies; and 

(iv) rural agencies, urban agencies, for-profit agen- 
cies, and nonprofit agencies. 

(B) Report. — Not later than January 1, 2015, the 
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission shall submit to 
Congress a report on the study conducted under subpara- 
graph (A), together with recommendations for such legisla- 
tion and administrative action as the Commission deter- 
mines appropriate. 

(b) Program-specific Outlier Cap. — Section 1895(b) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395fff(b)) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (3)(C), by striking "the aggregate" and all 
that follows through the period at the end and inserting "5 per- 
cent of the total payments estimated to be made based on the 
prospective payment system under this subsection for the pe- 
riod."; and 

(2) in paragraph (5) — 

(A) by striking "Outliers. — The Secretary" and insert- 
ing the following: "Outliers. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
Secretary"; 

(B) in subparagraph (A), as added by subparagraph 
(A), by striking "5 percent" and inserting "2.5 percent"; 
and 

(C) by adding at the end the following new subpara- 
graph: 

"(B) Program specific outlier cap. — The estimated 
total amount of additional payments or payment adjust- 
ments made under subparagraph (A) with respect to a 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3131 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



350 



home health agency for a year (beginning with 2011) may 
not exceed an amount equal to 10 percent of the estimated 
total amount of payments made under this section (with- 
out regard to this paragraph) with respect to the home 
health agency for the year.". 

(c) Application of the Medicare Rural Home Health Add- 
on Policy. — Section 421 of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Im- 
provement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173; 
117 Stat. 2283), as amended by section 5201(b) of the Deficit Re- 
duction Act of 2005 (Public Law 109-171; 120 Stat. 46), is amend- 
ed— 

(1) in the section heading, by striking "ONE-YEAR" and 
inserting "TEMPORARY"; and 

(2) in subsection (a) — 

(A) by striking ", and episodes" and inserting ", epi- 
sodes"; 

(B) by inserting "and episodes and visits ending on or 
after April 1, 2010, and before January 1, 2016," after 
"January 1, 2007,"; and 

(C) by inserting "(or, in the case of episodes and visits 
ending on or after April 1, 2010, and before January 1, 
2016, 3 percent)" before the period at the end. 

(d) Study and Report on the Development of Home 
Health Payment Revisions in Order to Ensure Access to 
Care and Payment for Severity of Illness. — [Replaced by sec- 
tion 10315(b)] 

(1) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services (in this section referred to as the "Secretary") shall 
conduct a study on home health agency costs involved with 
providing ongoing access to care to low-income Medicare bene- 
ficiaries or beneficiaries in medically underserved areas, and in 
treating beneficiaries with varying levels of severity of illness. 
In conducting the study, the Secretary may analyze items such 
as the following: 

(A) Methods to potentially revise the home health pro- 
spective payment system under section 1895 of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395fff) to account for costs related 
to patient severity of illness or to improving beneficiary ac- 
cess to care, such as — 

(i) payment adjustments for services that may in- 
volve additional or fewer resources; 

(ii) changes to reflect resources involved with pro- 
viding home health services to low-income Medicare 
beneficiaries or Medicare beneficiaries residing in 
medically underserved areas; 

(iii) ways outlier payments might be revised to re- 
flect costs of treating Medicare beneficiaries with high 
levels of severity of illness; and 

(iv) other issues determined appropriate by the 
Secretary. 

(B) Operational issues involved with potential imple- 
mentation of potential revisions to the home health pay- 
ment system, including impacts for both home health 
agencies and administrative and systems issues for the 

June 9, 2010 



351 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3131 



Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services, and any pos- 
sible payment vulnerabilities associated with imple- 
menting potential revisions. 

(C) Whether additional research might be needed. 

(D) Other items determined appropriate by the Sec- 
retary. 

(2) Considerations. — In conducting the study under para- 
graph (1), the Secretary may consider whether patient severity 
of illness and access to care could be measured by factors, such 
as — 

(A) population density and relative patient access to 
care; 

(B) variations in service costs for providing care to in- 
dividuals who are dually eligible under the Medicare and 
Medicaid programs; 

(C) the presence of severe or chronic diseases, which 
might be measured by multiple, discontinuous home 
health episodes; 

(D) poverty status, such as evidenced by the receipt of 
Supplemental Security Income under title XVI of the So- 
cial Security Act; and 

(E) other factors determined appropriate by the Sec- 
retary. 

(3) Report— Not later than March 1, 2014, the Secretary 
shall submit to Congress a report on the study conducted 
under paragraph (1), together with recommendations for such 
legislation and administrative action as the Secretary deter- 
mines appropriate. 

(4) Consultations. — In conducting the study under para- 
graph (1), the Secretary shall consult with appropriate stake- 
holders, such as groups representing home health agencies and 
groups representing Medicare beneficiaries. 

(5) Medicare demonstration project based on the re- 
sults OF THE STUDY. — 

(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (D), taking 
into account the results of the study conducted under para- 
graph (1), the Secretary may, as determined appropriate, 
provide for a demonstration project to test whether making 
payment adjustments for home health services under the 
Medicare program would substantially improve access to 
care for patients with high severity levels of illness or for 
low-income or underserved Medicare beneficiaries. 

(B) Waiving budget neutrality. — The Secretary 
shall not reduce the standard prospective payment amount 
(or amounts) under section 1895 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395fff) applicable to home health services fur- 
nished during a period to offset any increase in payments 
during such period resulting from the application of the 
payment adjustments under subparagraph (A). 

(C) No effect ON subsequent periods. — A payment 
adjustment resulting from the application of subparagraph 
(A) for a period — 

(i) shall not apply to payments for home health 
services under title XVIII after such period; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3132 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



352 



(ii) shall not be taken into account in calculating 
the payment amounts applicable for such services 
after such period. 

(D) Duration. — If the Secretary determines it appro- 
priate to conduct the demonstration project under this sub- 
section, the Secretary shall conduct the project for a four 
year period beginning not later than January 1, 2015. 

(E) Funding. — The Secretary shall provide for the 
transfer from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund 
under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395i) and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance 
Trust Fund established under section 1841 of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395t), in such proportion as the Secretary deter- 
mines appropriate, of $500,000,000 for the period of fiscal 
years 2015 through 2018. Such funds shall be made avail- 
able for the study described in paragraph (1) and the de- 
sign, implementation and evaluation of the demonstration 
described in this paragraph. Amounts available under this 
subparagraph shall be available until expended. 

(F) Evaluation and report. — If the Secretary deter- 
mines it appropriate to conduct the demonstration project 
under this subsection, the Secretary shall — 

(i) provide for an evaluation of the project; and 

(ii) submit to Congress, by a date specified by the 
Secretary, a report on the project. 

(G) Administration. — Chapter 35 of title 44, United 
States Code, shall not apply with respect to this sub- 
section. 

SEC. 3132. HOSPICE REFORM. 

(a) Hospice Care Payment Reforms. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1814(i) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395f(i)), as amended by section 3004(c), is amend- 
ed— 

(A) by redesignating paragraph (6) as paragraph (7); 

and 

(B) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following new 
paragraph: 

"(6)(A) The Secretary shall collect additional data and in- 
formation as the Secretary determines appropriate to revise 
payments for hospice care under this subsection pursuant to 
subparagraph (D) and for other purposes as determined appro- 
priate by the Secretary. The Secretary shall begin to collect 
such data by not later than January 1, 2011. 

"(B) The additional data and information to be collected 
under subparagraph (A) may include data and information 
on — 

"(i) charges and payments; 

"(ii) the number of days of hospice care which are at- 
tributable to individuals who are entitled to, or enrolled 
for, benefits under part A; and 

"(hi) with respect to each type of service included in 
hospice care — 

June 9, 2010 



353 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3132 



"(I) the number of days of hospice care attrib- 
utable to the type of service; 

"(II) the cost of the type of service; and 
"(III) the amount of payment for the type of serv- 
ice; 

"(iv) charitable contributions and other revenue of the 
hospice program; 

"(v) the number of hospice visits; 

"(vi) the type of practitioner providing the visit; and 

"(vii) the length of the visit and other basic informa- 
tion with respect to the visit. 

"(C) The Secretary may collect the additional data and in- 
formation under subparagraph (A) on cost reports, claims, or 
other mechanisms as the Secretary determines to be appro- 
priate. 

"(D)(i) Notwithstanding the preceding paragraphs of this 
subsection, not earlier than October 1, 2013, the Secretary 
shall, by regulation, implement revisions to the methodology 
for determining the payment rates for routine home care and 
other services included in hospice care under this part, as the 
Secretary determines to be appropriate. Such revisions may be 
based on an analysis of data and information collected under 
subparagraph (A). Such revisions may include adjustments to 
per diem payments that reflect changes in resource intensity 
in providing such care and services during the course of the en- 
tire episode of hospice care. 

"(ii) Revisions in payment implemented pursuant to clause 
(i) shall result in the same estimated amount of aggregate ex- 
penditures under this title for hospice care furnished in the fis- 
cal year in which such revisions in payment are implemented 
as would have been made under this title for such care in such 
fiscal year if such revisions had not been implemented. 

"(E) The Secretary shall consult with hospice programs 
and the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission regarding the 
additional data and information to be collected under subpara- 
graph (A) and the payment revisions under subparagraph 
(D).". 

(2) Conforming amendments. — Section 1814(i)(l)(C) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f(i)(l)(C)) is amended— 

(A) in clause (ii) — 

(i) in the matter preceding subclause (I), by insert- 
ing "(before the first fiscal year in which the payment 
revisions described in paragraph (6)(D) are imple- 
mented)" after "subsequent fiscal year"; and 

(ii) in subclause (VII), by inserting "(before the 
first fiscal year in which the payment revisions de- 
scribed in paragraph (6)(D) are implemented), subject 
to clause (iv)," after "subsequent fiscal year"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new clause: 
"(hi) With respect to routine home care and other 

services included in hospice care furnished during fis- 
cal years subsequent to the first fiscal year in which 
payment revisions described in paragraph (6)(D) are 
implemented, the payment rates for such care and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3133 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



354 



services shall be the payment rates in effect under 
this clause during the preceding fiscal year increased 
by, subject to clause (iv), the market basket percent- 
age increase (as defined in section 1886(b)(3)(B)(iii)) 
for the fiscal year.", 
(b) Adoption of MedPAC Hospice Program Eligibility Re- 
certification Recommendations. — Section 1814(a)(7) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f(a)(7)) is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (B), by striking "and" at the end; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: 

"(D) on and after January 1, 2011— 

"(i) a hospice physician or nurse practitioner has 
a face-to-face encounter with the individual to deter- 
mine continued eligibility of the individual for hospice 
care prior to the 180th-day recertification and each 
subsequent recertification under subparagraph (A)(ii) 
and attests that such visit took place (in accordance 
with procedures established by the Secretary); and 

"(ii) in the case of hospice care provided an indi- 
vidual for more than 180 days by a hospice program 
for which the number of such cases for such program 
comprises more than a percent (specified by the Sec- 
retary) of the total number of such cases for all pro- 
grams under this title, the hospice care provided to 
such individual is medically reviewed (in accordance 
with procedures established by the Secretary); and". 

SEC. 3133. IMPROVEMENT TO MEDICARE DISPROPORTIONATE SHARE 
HOSPITAL (DSH) PAYMENTS. 

Section 1886 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww), as 
amended by sections 3001, 3008, and 3025, is amended — 

(1) in subsection (d)(5)(F)(i), by striking "For" and insert- 
ing "Subject to subsection (r), for"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: 

"(r) Adjustments to Medicare DSH Payments. — [As revised 
by section 1104 ofHCERA} 

"(1) Empirically justified dsh payments. — For fiscal 
year 2014 and each subsequent fiscal year, instead of the 
amount of disproportionate share hospital payment that would 
otherwise be made under subsection (d)(5)(F) to a subsection 
(d) hospital for the fiscal year, the Secretary shall pay to the 
subsection (d) hospital 25 percent of such amount (which rep- 
resents the empirically justified amount for such payment, as 
determined by the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission in 
its March 2007 Report to the Congress). 

"(2) Additional payment. — In addition to the payment 
made to a subsection (d) hospital under paragraph (1), for fis- 
cal year 2014 and each subsequent fiscal year, the Secretary 
shall pay to such subsection (d) hospitals an additional amount 
equal to the product of the following factors: 

"(A) Factor one.— A factor equal to the difference be- 
tween — 

"(i) the aggregate amount of payments that would 
be made to subsection (d) hospitals under subsection 

June 9, 2010 



355 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3133 



(d)(5)(F) if this subsection did not apply for such fiscal 
year (as estimated by the Secretary); and 

"(ii) the aggregate amount of payments that are 
made to subsection (d) hospitals under paragraph (1) 
for such fiscal year (as so estimated). 
"(B) Factor two. — [As revised by section 10316] 

"(i) Fiscal years 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017. — For 
each of fiscal years 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017, a fac- 
tor equal to 1 minus the percent change in the percent 
of individuals under the age of 65 who are uninsured, 
as determined by comparing the percent of such indi- 
viduals — 

"(I) who are uninsured in 2013, the last year 
before coverage expansion under the Patient Pro- 
tection and Affordable Care Act (as calculated by 
the Secretary based on the most recent estimates 
available from the Director of the Congressional 
Budget Office before a vote in either House on the 
Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 
2010 that, if determined in the affirmative, would 
clear such Act for enrollment); and 

"(II) who are uninsured in the most recent pe- 
riod for which data is available (as so calculated), 
minus 0.1 percentage points for fiscal year 2014 and 
minus 0.2 percentage points for each of fiscal years 
2015, 2016, and 2017. 

"(ii) 2018 and subsequent years. — For fiscal year 
2018 and each subsequent fiscal year, a factor equal to 
1 minus the percent change in the percent of individ- 
uals who are uninsured, as determined by comparing 
the percent of individuals — 

"(I) who are uninsured in 2013 (as estimated 
by the Secretary, based on data from the Census 
Bureau or other sources the Secretary determines 
appropriate, and certified by the Chief Actuary of 
the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services); 
and 

"(II) who are uninsured in the most recent pe- 
riod for which data is available (as so estimated 
and certified), 

minus 0.2 percentage points for each of fiscal years 
2018 and 2019. 

"(C) Factor three. — A factor equal to the percent, for 
each subsection (d) hospital, that represents the quotient 
of— 

"(i) the amount of uncompensated care for such 
hospital for a period selected by the Secretary (as esti- 
mated by the Secretary, based on appropriate data (in- 
cluding, in the case where the Secretary determines 
that alternative data is available which is a better 
proxy for the costs of subsection (d) hospitals for treat- 
ing the uninsured, the use of such alternative data)); 
and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3134 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



356 



"(ii) the aggregate amount of uncompensated care 
for all subsection (d) hospitals that receive a payment 
under this subsection for such period (as so estimated, 
based on such data). 
"(3) Limitations on review. — There shall be no adminis- 
trative or judicial review under section 1869, section 1878, or 
otherwise of the following: 

"(A) Any estimate of the Secretary for purposes of de- 
termining the factors described in paragraph (2). 

"(B) Any period selected by the Secretary for such pur- 
poses.". 

SEC. 3134. MISVALUED CODES UNDER THE PHYSICIAN FEE SCHED- 
ULE. 

(a) In General. — Section 1848(c)(2) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(c)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new subparagraphs: 

"(K) Potentially misvalued codes. — 

"(i) In general. — The Secretary shall — 

"(I) periodically identify services as being po- 
tentially misvalued using criteria specified in 
clause (ii); and 

"(II) review and make appropriate adjust- 
ments to the relative values established under 
this paragraph for services identified as being po- 
tentially misvalued under subclause (I), 
"(ii) Identification of potentially misvalued 
CODES. — For purposes of identifying potentially 
misvalued services pursuant to clause (i)(I), the Sec- 
retary shall examine (as the Secretary determines to 
be appropriate) codes (and families of codes as appro- 
priate) for which there has been the fastest growth; 
codes (and families of codes as appropriate) that have 
experienced substantial changes in practice expenses; 
codes for new technologies or services within an appro- 
priate period (such as 3 years) after the relative values 
are initially established for such codes; multiple codes 
that are frequently billed in conjunction with fur- 
nishing a single service; codes with low relative val- 
ues, particularly those that are often billed multiple 
times for a single treatment; codes which have not 
been subject to review since the implementation of the 
RBRVS (the so-called 'Harvard-valued codes'); and 
such other codes determined to be appropriate by the 
Secretary. 

"(hi) Review and adjustments. — 

"(I) The Secretary may use existing processes 
to receive recommendations on the review and ap- 
propriate adjustment of potentially misvalued 
services described in clause (i)(II). 

"(II) The Secretary may conduct surveys, 
other data collection activities, studies, or other 
analyses as the Secretary determines to be appro- 
priate to facilitate the review and appropriate ad- 
justment described in clause (i)(II). 

June 9, 2010 



357 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3134 



"(III) The Secretary may use analytic contrac- 
tors to identify and analyze services identified 
under clause (i)(I), conduct surveys or collect data, 
and make recommendations on the review and ap- 
propriate adjustment of services described in 
clause (i)(II). 

"(IV) The Secretary may coordinate the review 
and appropriate adjustment described in clause 

(i) (II) with the periodic review described in sub- 
paragraph (B). 

"(V) As part of the review and adjustment de- 
scribed in clause (i)(II), including with respect to 
codes with low relative values described in clause 

(ii) , the Secretary may make appropriate coding 
revisions (including using existing processes for 
consideration of coding changes) which may in- 
clude consolidation of individual services into bun- 
dled codes for payment under the fee schedule 
under subsection (b). 

"(VI) The provisions of subparagraph 
(B)(ii)(II) shall apply to adjustments to relative 
value units made pursuant to this subparagraph 
in the same manner as such provisions apply to 
adjustments under subparagraph (B)(ii)(II). 
"(L) Validating relative value units. — 

"(i) In general. — The Secretary shall establish a 
process to validate relative value units under the fee 
schedule under subsection (b). 

"(ii) Components and elements of work. — The 
process described in clause (i) may include validation 
of work elements (such as time, mental effort and pro- 
fessional judgment, technical skill and physical effort, 
and stress due to risk) involved with furnishing a 
service and may include validation of the pre-, post-, 
and intra-service components of work. 

"(hi) Scope of codes. — The validation of work rel- 
ative value units shall include a sampling of codes for 
services that is the same as the codes listed under 
subparagraph (K)(ii). 

"(iv) Methods. — The Secretary may conduct the 
validation under this subparagraph using methods de- 
scribed in subclauses (I) through (V) of subparagraph 
(K)(iii) as the Secretary determines to be appropriate. 

"(v) Adjustments. — The Secretary shall make ap- 
propriate adjustments to the work relative value units 
under the fee schedule under subsection (b). The pro- 
visions of subparagraph (B)(ii)(II) shall apply to ad- 
justments to relative value units made pursuant to 
this subparagraph in the same manner as such provi- 
sions apply to adjustments under subparagraph 
(B)(ii)(II).". 
(b) Implementation. — 
(1) Administration. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3135 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



358 



(A) Chapter 35 of title 44, United States Code and the 
provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 
U.S.C. App.) shall not apply to this section or the amend- 
ment made by this section. 

(B) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the 
Secretary may implement subparagraphs (K) and (L) of 
1848(c)(2) of the Social Security Act, as added by sub- 
section (a), by program instruction or otherwise. 

(C) Section 4505(d) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 
is repealed. 

(D) Except for provisions related to confidentiality of 
information, the provisions of the Federal Acquisition Reg- 
ulation shall not apply to this section or the amendment 
made by this section. 

(2) Focusing cms resources on potentially over- 
valued codes. — Section 1868(a) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395ee(a)) is repealed. 

SEC. 3135. MODIFICATION OF EQUIPMENT UTILIZATION FACTOR FOR 
ADVANCED IMAGING SERVICES. 

(a) Adjustment in Practice Expense To Reflect Higher 
Presumed Utilization. — Section 1848 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-4) is amended— 

(1) in subsection (b)(4) — 

[(A) in subparagraph (B), by striking "subparagraph 
(A)" and inserting "this paragraph"; and [Amendment 
made by section 1107(1)(A) of HCERA in effect reverses this 
amendments 

(B) by adding at the end the following new subpara- 
graph: 

"(C) Adjustment in imaging utilization rate. — [Re- 
placed by section 1107(1)(B) of HCERA] With respect to 
fee schedules established for 2011 and subsequent years, 
in the methodology for determining practice expense rel- 
ative value units for expensive diagnostic imaging equip- 
ment under the final rule published by the Secretary in 
the Federal Register on November 25, 2009 (42 CFR 410 
et al.), the Secretary shall use a 75 percent assumption in- 
stead of the utilization rates otherwise established in such 
final rule."; and 

(2) in subsection (c)(2)(B)(v), by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new subclauses: [Reflects amendment made by section 
1107(2) of HCERA that struck subclauses (III), (IV), and (V) in- 
serted by this paragraph and inserting a single new subclause] 

"(III) Change in utilization rate for cer- 
tain imaging services. — Effective for fee sched- 
ules established beginning with 2011, reduced ex- 
penditures attributable to the change in the utili- 
zation rate applicable to 2011, as described in sub- 
section (b)(4)(C).". 

(b) Adjustment in Technical Component "discount" on 
Single-session Imaging to Consecutive Body Parts. — Section 
1848 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4), as amended 
by subsection (a), is amended — 

June 9, 2010 



359 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3136 



(1) in subsection (b)(4), by adding at the end the following 
new subparagraph: 

"(D) Adjustment in technical component discount 

ON SINGLE-SESSION IMAGING INVOLVING CONSECUTIVE BODY 
PARTS. — For services furnished on or after July 1, 2010, 
the Secretary shall increase the reduction in payments at- 
tributable to the multiple procedure payment reduction ap- 
plicable to the technical component for imaging under the 
final rule published by the Secretary in the Federal Reg- 
ister on November 21, 2005 (part 405 of title 42, Code of 
Federal Regulations) from 25 percent to 50 percent."; and 

(2) in subsection (c)(2)(B)(v), by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new subclause: 

"(VI) Additional reduced payment for mul- 
tiple imaging procedures. — Effective for fee 
schedules established beginning with 2010 (but 
not applied for services furnished prior to July 1, 
2010), reduced expenditures attributable to the in- 
crease in the multiple procedure payment reduc- 
tion from 25 to 50 percent (as described in sub- 
section (b)(4)(D)).". 
(c) Analysis by the Chief Actuary of the Centers for 
Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services. — Not later than January 1, 2013, 
the Chief Actuary of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services 
shall make publicly available an analysis of whether, for the period 
of 2010 through 2019, the cumulative expenditure reductions under 
title XVIII of the Social Security Act that are attributable to the 
adjustments under the amendments made by this section are pro- 
jected to exceed $3,000,000,000. 

SEC. 3136. REVISION OF PAYMENT FOR POWER-DRIVEN WHEEL- 
CHAIRS. 

(a) In General— Section 1834(a)(7)(A) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(7)(A)) is amended— 

(1) in clause (i) — 

(A) in subclause (II), by inserting "subclause (III) and" 
after "Subject to"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new subclause: 

"(III) Special rule for power-driven 
wheelchairs. — For purposes of payment for 
power-driven wheelchairs, subclause (II) shall be 
applied by substituting '15 percent' and '6 percent' 
for '10 percent' and '7.5 percent', respectively."; 
and 

(2) in clause (hi) — 

(A) in the heading, by inserting "complex, rehabili- 
tative" before "power-driven"; and 

(B) by inserting "complex, rehabilitative" before 
"power-driven". 

(b) Technical Amendment. — Section 1834(a)(7)(C)(ii)(II) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(7)(C)(ii)(II)) is amended by 
striking "(A)(ii) or". 

(c) Effective Date. — 

(1) In general. — Subject to paragraph (2), the amend- 
ments made by subsection (a) shall take effect on January 1, 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3137 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



360 



2011, and shall apply to power-driven wheelchairs furnished 
on or after such date. 

(2) Application to competitive bidding. — The amend- 
ments made by subsection (a) shall not apply to payment made 
for items and services furnished pursuant to contracts entered 
into under section 1847 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395w-3) prior to January 1, 2011, pursuant to the implemen- 
tation of subsection (a)(l)(B)(i)(I) of such section 1847. 

SEC. 3137. HOSPITAL WAGE INDEX IMPROVEMENT. 

(a) Extension. — [Replaced by section 10317] 

(1) In general. — Subsection (a) of section 106 of division 
B of the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006 (42 U.S.C. 
1395 note), as amended by section 117 of the Medicare, Med- 
icaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-173) 
and section 124 of the Medicare Improvements for Patients 
and Providers Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-275), is amended 
by striking "September 30, 2009" and inserting "September 30, 
2010". 

(2) Special rule for fiscal year 2010. — 

(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (B), for 
purposes of implementation of the amendment made by 
paragraph (1), including (notwithstanding paragraph (3) of 
section 117(a) of the Medicare, Medicaid and SCHIP Ex- 
tension Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-173), as amended by 
section 124(b) of the Medicare Improvements for Patients 
and Providers Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-275)) for pur- 
poses of the implementation of paragraph (2) of such sec- 
tion 117(a), during fiscal year 2010, the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services (in this subsection referred to 
as the "Secretary") shall use the hospital wage index that 
was promulgated by the Secretary in the Federal Register 
on August 27, 2009 (74 Fed. Reg. 43754), and any subse- 
quent corrections. 

(B) Exception. — Beginning on April 1, 2010, in deter- 
mining the wage index applicable to hospitals that qualify 
for wage index reclassification, the Secretary shall include 
the average hourly wage data of hospitals whose reclassi- 
fication was extended pursuant to the amendment made 
by paragraph (1) only if including such data results in a 
higher applicable reclassified wage index. 

(3) Adjustment for certain hospitals in fiscal year 
2010. — 

(A) In general. — In the case of a subsection (d) hos- 
pital (as defined in subsection (d)(1)(B) of section 1886 of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww)) with respect 
to which — 

(i) a reclassification of its wage index for purposes 
of such section was extended pursuant to the amend- 
ment made by paragraph (1); and 

(ii) the wage index applicable for such hospital for 
the period beginning on October 1, 2009, and ending 
on March 31, 2010, was lower than for the period be- 

June 9, 2010 



361 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3137 



ginning on April 1, 2010, and ending on September 30, 
2010, by reason of the application of paragraph (2)(B); 
the Secretary shall pay such hospital an additional pay- 
ment that reflects the difference between the wage index 
for such periods. 

(B) Timeframe for payments. — The Secretary shall 
make payments required under subparagraph by not later 
than December 31, 2010. 

(b) Plan for Reforming the Medicare Hospital Wage 
Index System. — 

(1) In general. — Not later than December 31, 2011, the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section re- 
ferred to as the "Secretary") shall submit to Congress a report 
that includes a plan to reform the hospital wage index system 
under section 1886 of the Social Security Act. 

(2) Details. — In developing the plan under paragraph (1), 
the Secretary shall take into account the goals for reforming 
such system set forth in the Medicare Payment Advisory Com- 
mission June 2007 report entitled "Report to Congress: Pro- 
moting Greater Efficiency in Medicare", including establishing 
a new hospital compensation index system that — 

(A) uses Bureau of Labor Statistics data, or other data 
or methodologies, to calculate relative wages for each geo- 
graphic area involved; 

(B) minimizes wage index adjustments between and 
within metropolitan statistical areas and statewide rural 
areas; 

(C) includes methods to minimize the volatility of 
wage index adjustments that result from implementation 
of policy, while maintaining budget neutrality in applying 
such adjustments; 

(D) takes into account the effect that implementation 
of the system would have on health care providers and on 
each region of the country; 

(E) addresses issues related to occupational mix, such 
as staffing practices and ratios, and any evidence on the 
effect on quality of care or patient safety as a result of the 
implementation of the system; and 

(F) provides for a transition. 

(3) Consultation. — In developing the plan under para- 
graph (1), the Secretary shall consult with relevant affected 
parties. 

(c) Use of Particular Criteria for Determining Reclassi- 
fications. — Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in making 
decisions on applications for reclassification of a subsection (d) hos- 
pital (as defined in paragraph (1)(B) of section 1886(d) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)) for the purposes described in 
paragraph (10)(D)(v) of such section for fiscal year 2011 and each 
subsequent fiscal year (until the first fiscal year beginning on or 
after the date that is 1 year after the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services submits the report to Congress under subsection 
(b)), the Geographic Classification Review Board established under 
paragraph (10) of such section shall use the average hourly wage 
comparison criteria used in making such decisions as of September 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3138 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



362 



30, 2008. The preceding sentence shall be effected in a budget neu- 
tral manner. 

SEC. 3138. TREATMENT OF CERTAIN CANCER HOSPITALS. 

Section 1833(t) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 13951(f)) 
is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 

"(18) Authorization of adjustment for cancer hos- 
pitals. — 

"(A) Study. — The Secretary shall conduct a study to 
determine if, under the system under this subsection, costs 
incurred by hospitals described in section 1886(d)(l)(B)(v) 
with respect to ambulatory payment classification groups 
exceed those costs incurred by other hospitals furnishing 
services under this subsection (as determined appropriate 
by the Secretary). In conducting the study under this sub- 
paragraph, the Secretary shall take into consideration the 
cost of drugs and biologicals incurred by such hospitals. 

"(B) Authorization of adjustment. — Insofar as the 
Secretary determines under subparagraph (A) that costs 
incurred by hospitals described in section 1886(d)(l)(B)(v) 
exceed those costs incurred by other hospitals furnishing 
services under this subsection, the Secretary shall provide 
for an appropriate adjustment under paragraph (2)(E) to 
reflect those higher costs effective for services furnished on 
or after January 1, 2011.". 
[Section 10324(b) of PPACA, p. 869, provided for amendments 
to section 1833( t) of Social Security Act providing a floor on area 
wage adjustment factor for hospital outpatient department services 
in frontier States] 

SEC. 3139. PAYMENT FOR BIOSIMILAR BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS. 

(a) In General. — Section 1847A of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395w-3a) is amended— 
(1) in subsection (b) — 

(A) in paragraph (1) — 

(i) in subparagraph (A), by striking "or" at the 

end; 

(ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking the period at 
the end and inserting "; or"; and 

(iii) by adding at the end the following new sub- 
paragraph: 

"(C) in the case of a biosimilar biological product (as 
defined in subsection (c)(6)(H)), the amount determined 
under paragraph (8)."; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 
"(8) Biosimilar biological product. — The amount speci- 
fied in this paragraph for a biosimilar biological product de- 
scribed in paragraph (1)(C) is the sum of — 

"(A) the average sales price as determined using the 
methodology described under paragraph (6) applied to a 
biosimilar biological product for all National Drug Codes 
assigned to such product in the same manner as such 
paragraph is applied to drugs described in such paragraph; 
and 

June 9, 2010 



363 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3140 



"(B) 6 percent of the amount determined under para- 
graph (4) for the reference biological product (as defined in 
subsection (c)(6)(I))."; and 

(2) in subsection (c)(6), by adding at the end the following 
new subparagraph: 

"(H) Biosimilar biological product. — The term 'bio- 
similar biological product' means a biological product ap- 
proved under an abbreviated application for a license of a 
biological product that relies in part on data or informa- 
tion in an application for another biological product li- 
censed under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act. 

"(I) Reference biological product. — The term 'ref- 
erence biological product' means the biological product li- 
censed under such section 351 that is referred to in the ap- 
plication described in subparagraph (H) of the biosimilar 
biological product.", 
(b) Effective Date. — The amendments made by subsection (a) 
shall apply to payments for biosimilar biological products beginning 
with the first day of the second calendar quarter after enactment 
of legislation providing for a biosimilar pathway (as determined by 
the Secretary). 

SEC. 3140 [42 U.S.C. 1395d note]. MEDICARE HOSPICE CONCURRENT 
CARE DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM. 

(a) Establishment. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services (in this section referred to as the "Secretary") shall es- 
tablish a Medicare Hospice Concurrent Care demonstration 
program at participating hospice programs under which Medi- 
care beneficiaries are furnished, during the same period, hos- 
pice care and any other items or services covered under title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) from 
funds otherwise paid under such title to such hospice pro- 
grams. 

(2) Duration. — The demonstration program under this 
section shall be conducted for a 3-year period. 

(3) Sites. — The Secretary shall select not more than 15 
hospice programs at which the demonstration program under 
this section shall be conducted. Such hospice programs shall be 
located in urban and rural areas. 

(b) Independent Evaluation and Reports. — 

(1) Independent evaluation. — The Secretary shall pro- 
vide for the conduct of an independent evaluation of the dem- 
onstration program under this section. Such independent eval- 
uation shall determine whether the demonstration program 
has improved patient care, quality of life, and cost-effectiveness 
for Medicare beneficiaries participating in the demonstration 
program. 

(2) Reports. — The Secretary shall submit to Congress a 
report containing the results of the evaluation conducted under 
paragraph (1), together with such recommendations as the Sec- 
retary determines appropriate. 

(c) Budget Neutrality. — With respect to the 3-year period of 
the demonstration program under this section, the Secretary shall 
ensure that the aggregate expenditures under title XVIII for such 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3141 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



364 



period shall not exceed the aggregate expenditures that would have 
been expended under such title if the demonstration program 
under this section had not been implemented. 

SEC. 3141 [42 U.S.C. 1395ww note]. APPLICATION OF BUDGET NEU- 
TRALITY ON A NATIONAL BASIS IN THE CALCULATION OF 
THE MEDICARE HOSPITAL WAGE INDEX FLOOR. 

In the case of discharges occurring on or after October 1, 2010, 
for purposes of applying section 4410 of the Balanced Budget Act 
of 1997 (42 U.S.C. 1395ww note) and paragraph (h)(4) of section 
412.64 of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations, the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services shall administer subsection (b) of such 
section 4410 and paragraph (e) of such section 412.64 in the same 
manner as the Secretary administered such subsection (b) and 
paragraph (e) for discharges occurring during fiscal year 2008 
(through a uniform, national adjustment to the area wage index). 

SEC. 3142. HHS STUDY ON URBAN MEDICARE-DEPENDENT HOSPITALS. 

(a) Study. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services (in this section referred to as the "Secretary") shall 
conduct a study on the need for an additional payment for 
urban Medicare-dependent hospitals for inpatient hospital 
services under section 1886 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395ww). Such study shall include an analysis of — 

(A) the Medicare inpatient margins of urban Medicare- 
dependent hospitals, as compared to other hospitals which 
receive 1 or more additional payments or adjustments 
under such section (including those payments or adjust- 
ments described in paragraph (2)(A)); and 

(B) whether payments to medicare-dependent, small 
rural hospitals under subsection (d)(5)(G) of such section 
should be applied to urban Medicare-dependent hospitals. 

(2) Urban medicare-dependent hospital defined. — For 
purposes of this section, the term "urban Medicare-dependent 
hospital" means a subsection (d) hospital (as defined in sub- 
section (d)(1)(B) of such section) that — 

(A) does not receive any additional payment or adjust- 
ment under such section, such as payments for indirect 
medical education costs under subsection (d)(5)(B) of such 
section, disproportionate share payments under subsection 
(d)(5)(A) of such section, payments to a rural referral cen- 
ter under subsection (d)(5)(C) of such section, payments to 
a critical access hospital under section 1814(1) of such Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395f(l)), payments to a sole community hos- 
pital under subsection (d)(5)(D) of such section 1886, or 
payments to a medicare-dependent, small rural hospital 
under subsection (d)(5)(G) of such section 1886; and 

(B) for which more than 60 percent of its inpatient 
days or discharges during 2 of the 3 most recently audited 
cost reporting periods for which the Secretary has a settled 
cost report were attributable to inpatients entitled to bene- 
fits under part A of title XVIII of such Act. 

(b) Report. — Not later than 9 months after the date of enact- 
ment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report 

June 9, 2010 



365 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3201 



containing the results of the study conducted under subsection (a), 
together with recommendations for such legislation and adminis- 
trative action as the Secretary determines appropriate. 
SEC. 3143. PROTECTING HOME HEALTH BENEFITS. 

Nothing in the provisions of, or amendments made by, this Act 
shall result in the reduction of guaranteed home health benefits 
under title XVIII of the Social Security Act. 

Subtitle C — Provisions Relating to Part C 

SEC. 3201. [MEDICARE ADVANTAGE PAYMENT] [REPEALED &amp; RE- 
PLACED]. 

[Section 3201 (and the amendments made by such section, as 
previously amended by section 10318) was repealed by section 
1102(a) of HCERA. Section 1102(b) of HCERA amended section 
1853 of SSA to provide for a phase-in of modified MA benchmarks 
under a blended benchmark amount under a new subsection (n); 
section 1102(c) of HCERA further amended section 1853 of SSA to 
apply a percentage quality increase under a new subsection (o). Sec- 
tions 1102(b)-(c) of HCERA shown belowl 

(b) [Sec. 1102(b) of HCERA:] Phase-in of Modified Bench- 
marks.— Section 1853 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w- 
23) is amended — 

(1) in subsection (j)(l)(A), by striking "(or, beginning with 
2007, V12 of the applicable amount determined under sub- 
section (k)(l)) for the area for the year" and inserting "for the 
area for the year (or, for 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010, Viz of the 
applicable amount determined under subsection (k)(l) for the 
area for the year; for 2011, Y12 of the applicable amount deter- 
mined under subsection (k)(l) for the area for 2010; and, begin- 
ning with 2012, Y12 of the blended benchmark amount deter- 
mined under subsection (n)(l) for the area for the year)"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: 
"(n) Determination of Blended Benchmark Amount. — 

"(1) In general. — For purposes of subsection (j), subject to 
paragraphs (3), (4), and (5), the term 'blended benchmark 
amount' means for an area — 

"(A) for 2012 the sum of— 

"(i) Y2 of the applicable amount for the area and 
year; and 

"(ii) Y2 of the amount specified in paragraph (2)(A) 
for the area and year; and 

"(B) for a subsequent year the amount specified in 
paragraph (2)(A) for the area and year. 
"(2) Specified amount. — 

"(A) In general. — The amount specified in this sub- 
paragraph for an area and year is the product of — 

"(i) the base payment amount specified in sub- 
paragraph (E) for the area and year adjusted to take 
into account the phase-out in the indirect costs of med- 
ical education from capitation rates described in sub- 
section (k)(4); and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3201 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



366 



"(ii) the applicable percentage for the area for the 
year specified under subparagraph (B). 
"(B) Applicable percentage. — Subject to subpara- 
graph (D), the applicable percentage specified in this sub- 
paragraph for an area for a year in the case of an area 
that is ranked — 

"(i) in the highest quartile under subparagraph 
(C) for the previous year is 95 percent; 

"(ii) in the second highest quartile under such 
subparagraph for the previous year is 100 percent; 

"(hi) in the third highest quartile under such sub- 
paragraph for the previous year is 107.5 percent; or 

"(iv) in the lowest quartile under such subpara- 
graph for the previous year is 115 percent. 
"(C) Periodic ranking. — For purposes of this para- 
graph in the case of an area located — 

"(i) in 1 of the 50 States or the District of Colum- 
bia, the Secretary shall rank such area in each year 
specified under subsection (c)(l)(D)(ii) based upon the 
level of the amount specified in subparagraph (A)(i) for 
such areas; or 

"(ii) in a territory, the Secretary shall rank such 
areas in each such year based upon the level of the 
amount specified in subparagraph (A)(i) for such area 
relative to quartile rankings computed under clause 
(i). 

"(D) 1-YEAR TRANSITION FOR CHANGES IN APPLICABLE 

percentage. — If, for a year after 2012, there is a change 
in the quartile in which an area is ranked compared to the 
previous year, the applicable percentage for the area in the 
year shall be the average of — 

"(i) the applicable percentage for the area for the 
previous year; and 

"(ii) the applicable percentage that would other- 
wise apply for the area for the year. 
"(E) Base payment amount. — Subject to subpara- 
graph (F), the base payment amount specified in this sub- 
paragraph — 

"(i) for 2012 is the amount specified in subsection 
(c)(1)(D) for the area for the year; or 
"(ii) for a subsequent year that — 

"(I) is not specified under subsection 
(c)(l)(D)(ii), is the base amount specified in this 
subparagraph for the area for the previous year, 
increased by the national per capita MA growth 
percentage, described in subsection (c)(6) for that 
succeeding year, but not taking into account any 
adjustment under subparagraph (C) of such sub- 
section for a year before 2004; and 

"(II) is specified under subsection (c)(l)(D)(ii), 
is the amount specified in subsection (c)(1)(D) for 
the area for the year. 
"(F) Application of indirect medical education 
phase-out. — The base payment amount specified in sub- 
June 9, 2010 



367 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3201 



paragraph (E) for a year shall be adjusted in the same 
manner under paragraph (4) of subsection (k) as the appli- 
cable amount is adjusted under such subsection. 
"(3) Alternative phase-ins. — 

"(A) 4-year phase-in for certain areas. — If the dif- 
ference between the applicable amount (as denned in sub- 
section (k)) for an area for 2010 and the projected 2010 
benchmark amount (as defined in subparagraph (C)) for 
the area is at least $30 but less than $50, the blended 
benchmark amount for the area is — 
"(i) for 2012 the sum of— 

"(I) S A of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

"(II) Ya of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; 
"(ii) for 2013 the sum of— 

"(I) Yz of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

"(II) Yz of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; 
"(hi) for 2014 the sum of— 

"(I) Ya of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

"(II) 3 A of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; and 
"(iv) for a subsequent year the amount specified in 
paragraph (2)(A) for the area and year. 
"(B) 6-year phase-in for certain areas. — If the dif- 
ference between the applicable amount (as defined in sub- 
section (k)) for an area for 2010 and the projected 2010 
benchmark amount (as defined in subparagraph (Q) for 
the area is at least $50, the blended benchmark amount 
for the area is — 

"(i) for 2012 the sum of— 

"(I) % of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

"(II) Ye, of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; 
"(ii) for 2013 the sum of— 

"(I) % of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

"(II) Ys of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; 
"(iii) for 2014 the sum of— 

"(I) Yz of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

"(II) Yz of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; 
"(iv) for 2015 the sum of— 

"(I) Yz of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

"(II) % of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; and 
"(v) for 2016 the sum of— 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3201 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



368 



"(I) Ve of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

"(II) % of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; and 
"(vi) for a subsequent year the amount specified in 
paragraph (2)(A) for the area and year. 
"(C) Projected 2010 benchmark amount. — The pro- 
jected 2010 benchmark amount described in this subpara- 
graph for an area is equal to the sum of — 

"(i) Y2 of the applicable amount (as defined in sub- 
section (k)) for the area for 2010; and 

"(ii) V2 of the amount specified in paragraph (2)(A) 
for the area for 2010 but determined as if there were 
substituted for the applicable percentage specified in 
clause (ii) of such paragraph the sum of — 

"(I) the applicable percent that would be spec- 
ified under subparagraph (B) of paragraph (2) (de- 
termined without regard to subparagraph (D) of 
such paragraph) for the area for 2010 if any ref- 
erence in such paragraph to 'the previous year' 
were deemed a reference to 2010; and 

"(II) the applicable percentage increase that 
would apply to a qualifying plan in the area under 
subsection (o) as if any reference in such sub- 
section to 2012 were deemed a reference to 2010 
and as if the determination of a qualifying county 
under paragraph (3)(B) of such subsection were 
made for 2010. 

"(4) Cap on benchmark amount. — In no case shall the 
blended benchmark amount for an area for a year (determined 
taking into account subsection (0)) be greater than the applica- 
ble amount that would (but for the application of this sub- 
section) be determined under subsection (k)(l) for the area for 
the year. 

"(5) Non-application to pace plans. — This subsection 
shall not apply to payments to a PACE program under section 
1894.". 

(c) [Sec. 1102(c) of HCERA:~\ Applicable Percentage Quality In- 
creases.— Section 1853 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-23), as 
amended by subsection (b), is amended — 

(1) in subsection (j), by inserting "subject to subsection (o)," 
after "For purposes of this part,"; 

(2) in subsection (n)(2)(B), as added by subsection (b), by 
inserting ", subject to subsection (0)" after "as follows"; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following new subsection: 
"(0) Applicable Percentage Quality Increases. — 

"(1) In general. — Subject to the succeeding paragraphs, in 
the case of a qualifying plan with respect to a year beginning 
with 2012, the applicable percentage under subsection (n)(2)(B) 
shall be increased on a plan or contract level, as determined 
by the Secretary — 

"(A) for 2012, by 1.5 percentage points; 

"(B) for 2013, by 3.0 percentage points; and 

June 9, 2010 



369 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3201 



"(C) for 2014 or a subsequent year, by 5.0 percentage 
points. 

"(2) Increase for qualifying plans in qualifying coun- 
ties. — The increase applied under paragraph (1) for a quali- 
fying plan located in a qualifying county for a year shall be 
doubled. 

"(3) Qualifying plans and qualifying county defined; 
application of increases to low enrollment and new 
plans. — For purposes of this subsection: 
"(A) Qualifying plan. — 

"(i) In general. — The term 'qualifying plan' 
means, for a year and subject to paragraph (4), a plan 
that had a quality rating under paragraph (4) of 4 
stars or higher based on the most recent data avail- 
able for such year. 

"(ii) Application of increases to low enroll- 
ment plans. — 

"(I) 2012.— For 2012, the term 'qualifying 
plan' includes an MA plan that the Secretary de- 
termines is not able to have a quality rating 
under paragraph (4) because of low enrollment. 

"(II) 2013 and subsequent years. — For 2013 
and subsequent years, for purposes of determining 
whether an MA plan with low enrollment (as de- 
fined by the Secretary) is included as a qualifying 
plan, the Secretary shall establish a method to 
apply to MA plans with low enrollment (as defined 
by the Secretary) the computation of quality rat- 
ing and the rating system under paragraph (4). 
"(hi) Application of increases to new plans. — 
"(I) In general. — A new MA plan that meets 
criteria specified by the Secretary shall be treated 
as a qualifying plan, except that in applying para- 
graph (1), the applicable percentage under sub- 
section (n)(2)(B) shall be increased — 

"(aa) for 2012, by 1.5 percentage points; 
"(bb) for 2013, by 2.5 percentage points; 

and 

"(cc) for 2014 or a subsequent year, by 3.5 
percentage points. 

"(II) New ma plan defined. — The term 'new 
MA plan' means, with respect to a year, a plan of- 
fered by an organization or sponsor that has not 
had a contract as a Medicare Advantage organiza- 
tion in the preceding 3-year period. 
"(B) Qualifying county. — The term 'qualifying coun- 
ty' means, for a year, a county — 

"(i) that has an MA capitation rate that, in 2004, 
was based on the amount specified in subsection 
(c)(1)(B) for a Metropolitan Statistical Area with a 
population of more than 250,000; 

"(ii) for which, as of December 2009, of the Medi- 
care Advantage eligible individuals residing in the 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3202 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



370 



county at least 25 percent of such individuals were en- 
rolled in Medicare Advantage plans; and 

"(iii) that has per capita fee-for-service spending 
that is lower than the national monthly per capita cost 
for expenditures for individuals enrolled under the 
original medicare fee-for-service program for the year. 
"(4) Quality determinations for application of in- 
crease. — 

"(A) Quality determination. — The quality rating for 
a plan shall be determined according to a 5-star rating sys- 
tem (based on the data collected under section 1852(e)). 

"(B) Plans that failed to report. — An MA plan 
which does not report data that enables the Secretary to 
rate the plan for purposes of this paragraph shall be 
counted as having a rating of fewer than 3.5 stars. 
"(5) Exception for pace plans. — This subsection shall not 
apply to payments to a PACE program under section 1894.". 

(4) Determination of medicare part d low-income 
benchmark premium. — {Amended section 1860D- 
14(b)(2)(B)(iii) of SSA, as amended by section 3302] 

SEC. 3202. BENEFIT PROTECTION AND SIMPLIFICATION. 

(a) Limitation on Variation of Cost Sharing for Certain 
Benefits. — 

(1) In general— Section 1852(a)(1)(B) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-22(a)(l)(B)) is amended— 

(A) in clause (i), by inserting ", subject to clause (iii)," 
after "and B or"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new clauses: 
"(iii) Limitation on variation of cost sharing 

for certain benefits. — Subject to clause (v), cost- 
sharing for services described in clause (iv) shall not 
exceed the cost-sharing required for those services 
under parts A and B. 

"(iv) Services described. — The following services 
are described in this clause: 

"(I) Chemotherapy administration services. 
"(II) Renal dialysis services (as defined in sec- 
tion 1881(bX14XB)). 

"(Ill) Skilled nursing care. 
"(IV) Such other services that the Secretary 
determines appropriate (including services that 
the Secretary determines require a high level of 
predictability and transparency for beneficiaries), 
"(v) Exception. — In the case of services described 
in clause (iv) for which there is no cost-sharing re- 
quired under parts A and B, cost-sharing may be re- 
quired for those services in accordance with clause 
(i).". 

(2) Effective date. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section shall apply to plan years beginning on or after January 
1, 2011. 

(b) Application of Rebates, Performance Bonuses, and 
Premiums. — 

June 9, 2010 



371 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3202 



(1) Application of rebates. — Section 1854(b)(1)(C) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-24(b)(l)(C)) is amended— 

(A) in clause (ii), by striking "REBATE. — A rebate" and 
inserting "rebate FOR plan years before 2012. — For plan 
years before 2012, a rebate"; 

(B) by redesignating clauses (iii) and (iv) as clauses 
(vii) and (viii) [Reflects subsequent redesignation made by 
section 1102(d)(2) ofHCERA}; and 

(C) by inserting after clause (ii) the following new 
clause: [As revised by section 1102(d)(2) ofHCERA] 

"(iii) Applicable rebate percentage. — The appli- 
cable rebate percentage specified in this clause for a 
plan for a year, based on the system under section 
1853(o)(4)(A), is the sum of— 

"(I) the product of the old phase-in proportion 
for the year under clause (iv) and 75 percent; and 
"(II) the product of the new phase-in propor- 
tion for the year under clause (iv) and the final 
applicable rebate percentage under clause (v). 
"(iv) Old and new phase-in proportions. — For 
purposes of clause (iv) — 

"(I) for 2012, the old phase-in proportion is % 
and the new phase-in proportion is Va; 

"(II) for 2013, the old phase-in proportion is 
Ys and the new phase-in proportion is %; and 

"(III) for 2014 and any subsequent year, the 
old phase-in proportion is and the new phase-in 
proportion is 1. 

"(v) Final applicable rebate percentage. — Sub- 
ject to clause (vi), the final applicable rebate percent- 
age under this clause is — 

"(I) in the case of a plan with a quality rating 
under such system of at least 4.5 stars, 70 per- 
cent; 

"(II) in the case of a plan with a quality rating 
under such system of at least 3.5 stars and less 
than 4.5 stars, 65 percent; and 

"(III) in the case of a plan with a quality rat- 
ing under such system of less than 3.5 stars, 50 
percent. 

"(vi) Treatment of low enrollment and new 
plans. — For purposes of clause (v) — 

"(I) for 2012, in the case of a plan described 
in subclause (I) of subsection (o)(3)(A)(ii), the plan 
shall be treated as having a rating of 4.5 stars; 
and 

"(II) for 2012 or a subsequent year, in the 
case of a new MA plan (as defined under sub- 
clause (III) of subsection (o)(3)(A)(iii)) that is 
treated as a qualifying plan pursuant to subclause 
(I) of such subsection, the plan shall be treated as 
having a rating of 3.5 stars.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3203 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



372 



(2) Application of performance bonuses. — Section 
1853(n) of the Social Security Act, as added by section 3201(f), 
is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 

"(6) Application of performance bonuses. — For plan 
years beginning on or after January 1, 2014, any performance 
bonus paid to an MA plan under this subsection shall be used 
for the purposes, and in the priority order, described in sub- 
clauses (I) through (III) of section 1854(bXl)(C)(iii).". 

(3) Application of ma monthly supplementary bene- 
ficiary premium. — Section 1854(b)(2)(C) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-24(b)(2)(C)) is amended— 

(A) by striking "Premium. — The term" and inserting 
"premium. — 

"(i) In general. — The term"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new clause: 
"(ii) Application of ma monthly supplementary 

beneficiary premium. — For plan years beginning on 
or after January 1, 2012, any MA monthly supple- 
mentary beneficiary premium charged to an individual 
enrolled in an MA plan shall be used for the purposes, 
and in the priority order, described in subclauses (I) 
through (III) of paragraph (l)(C)(iii).". 

SEC. 3203. [APPLICATION OF CODING INTENSITY ADJUSTMENT DUR- 
ING MA PAYMENT TRANSITION] [REPEALED AND RE- 
PLACED!. 

[Section 3203 (and the amendments made by such section) was 
repealed by section 1102(a) ofHCERA.~\ 

[Section 1102(e) ofHCERA amended section 1853(a)(l)(C)(ii) of 
the Social Security Act with respect to the coding intensity adjust- 
ment, shown belowi\ 

(e) [Sec. 1102(e) of HCERA] Coding Intensity Adjustment. — 
Section 1853(a)(l)(C)(ii) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w- 
23(a)(l)(C)(ii)) is amended — 

(1) in the heading, by striking "DURING PHASEOUT OF BUDG- 
ET neutrality factor" and inserting "of coding adjust- 
ment"; 

(2) in the matter before subclause (I), by striking "through 
2010" and inserting "and each subsequent year"; and 

(3) in subclause (II) — 

(A) in the first sentence, by inserting "annually" before 
"conduct an analysis"; 

(B) in the second sentence — 

(i) by inserting "on a timely basis" after "are incor- 
porated"; and 

(ii) by striking "only for 2008, 2009, and 2010" 
and inserting "for 2008 and subsequent years"; 

(C) in the third sentence, by inserting "and updated as 
appropriate" before the period at the end; and 

(D) by adding at the end the following new subclauses: 

"(III) In calculating each year's adjustment, 
the adjustment factor shall be for 2014, not less 
than the adjustment factor applied for 2010, plus 
1.3 percentage points; for each of years 2015 
through 2018, not less than the adjustment factor 

June 9, 2010 



373 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3205 



applied for the previous year, plus 0.25 percentage 
point; and for 2019 and each subsequent year, not 
less than 5. 7 percent. 

"(IV) Such adjustment shall be applied to risk 
scores until the Secretary implements risk adjust- 
ment using Medicare Advantage diagnostic, cost, 
and use data.". 

SEC. 3204. SIMPLIFICATION OF ANNUAL BENEFICIARY ELECTION PE- 
RIODS. 

(a) Annual 45-day Period for Disenrollment From MA 
Plans To Elect To Receive Benefits Under the Original 
Medicare Fee-for-service Program. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1851(e)(2)(C) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-l(e)(2XC)) is amended to read as fol- 
lows: 

"(C) Annual 45-day period for disenrollment from 

MA PLANS TO ELECT TO RECEIVE BENEFITS UNDER THE 
ORIGINAL MEDICARE FEE-FOR-SERVICE PROGRAM. — Subject 
to subparagraph (D), at any time during the first 45 days 
of a year (beginning with 2011), an individual who is en- 
rolled in a Medicare Advantage plan may change the elec- 
tion under subsection (a)(1), but only with respect to cov- 
erage under the original medicare fee-for-service program 
under parts A and B, and may elect qualified prescription 
drug coverage in accordance with section 1860D-1.". 

(2) Effective date. — The amendment made by paragraph 
(1) shall apply with respect to 2011 and succeeding years. 

(b) Timing of the Annual, Coordinated Election Period 
Under Parts C and D. — Section 1851(e)(3)(B) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-l(e)(3)(B)) is amended— 

(1) in clause (iii), by striking "and" at the end; 

(2) in clause (iv) — 

(A) by striking "and succeeding years" and inserting ", 
2008, 2009, and 2010"; and 

(B) by striking the period at the end and inserting "; 
and"; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following new clause: 

"(v) with respect to 2012 and succeeding years, the 
period beginning on October 15 and ending on Decem- 
ber 7 of the year before such year.". 

SEC. 3205. EXTENSION FOR SPECIALIZED MA PLANS FOR SPECIAL 
NEEDS INDIVIDUALS. 

(a) Extension of SNP Authority. — Section 1859(f)(1) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-28(f)(l)), as amended by sec- 
tion 164(a) of the Medicare Improvements for Patients and Pro- 
viders Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-275), is amended by striking 
"2011" and inserting "2014". 

(b) Authority To Apply Frailty Adjustment Under PACE 
Payment Rules. — Section 1853(a)(1)(B) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-23(a)(l)(B)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new clause: 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3205 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



374 



"(iv) Authority to apply frailty adjustment 

UNDER PACE PAYMENT RULES FOR CERTAIN SPECIALIZED 
MA PLANS FOR SPECIAL NEEDS INDIVIDUALS. — 

"(I) In general. — Notwithstanding the pre- 
ceding provisions of this paragraph, for plan year 
2011 and subsequent plan years, in the case of a 
plan described in subclause (II), the Secretary 
may apply the payment rules under section 
1894(d) (other than paragraph (3) of such section) 
rather than the payment rules that would other- 
wise apply under this part, but only to the extent 
necessary to reflect the costs of treating high con- 
centrations of frail individuals. 

"(II) Plan described. — A plan described in 
this subclause is a specialized MA plan for special 
needs individuals described in section 
1859(b)(6)(B)(ii) that is fully integrated with 
capitated contracts with States for Medicaid bene- 
fits, including long-term care, and that have simi- 
lar average levels of frailty (as determined by the 
Secretary) as the PACE program.", 
(c) Transition and Exception Regarding Restriction on 

Enrollment. — Section 1859(f) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 

1395w-28(f)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 

paragraph: 

"(6) Transition and exception regarding restriction 
on enrollment. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (C), the 
Secretary shall establish procedures for the transition of 
applicable individuals to — 

"(i) a Medicare Advantage plan that is not a spe- 
cialized MA plan for special needs individuals (as de- 
fined in subsection (b)(6)); or 

"(ii) the original medicare fee-for-service program 
under parts A and B. 

"(B) Applicable individuals. — For purposes of clause 
(i), the term 'applicable individual' means an individual 
who — 

"(i) is enrolled under a specialized MA plan for 
special needs individuals (as defined in subsection 
(b)(6)); and 

"(ii) is not within the 1 or more of the classes of 
special needs individuals to which enrollment under 
the plan is restricted to. 

"(C) Exception. — The Secretary shall provide for an 
exception to the transition described in subparagraph (A) 
for a limited period of time for individuals enrolled under 
a specialized MA plan for special needs individuals de- 
scribed in subsection (b)(6)(B)(ii) who are no longer eligible 
for medical assistance under title XIX. 

"(D) Timeline for initial transition. — The Secretary 
shall ensure that applicable individuals enrolled in a spe- 
cialized MA plan for special needs individuals (as denned 
in subsection (b)(6)) prior to January 1, 2010, are 

June 9, 2010 



375 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3205 



transitioned to a plan or the program described in sub- 
paragraph (A) by not later than January 1, 2013.". 

(d) Temporary Extension of Authority To Operate but No 
Service Area Expansion for Dual Special Needs Plans That 
Do Not Meet Certain Requirements. — Section 164(c)(2) of the 
Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 
(Public Law 110-275) is amended by striking "December 31, 2010" 
and inserting "December 31, 2012". 

(e) Authority To Require Special Needs Plans Be NCQA 
Approved.— Section 1859(f) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395w-28(f)), as amended by subsections (a) and (c), is amended — 

(1) in paragraph (2), by adding at the end the following 
new subparagraph: 

"(C) If applicable, the plan meets the requirement de- 
scribed in paragraph (7)."; 

(2) in paragraph (3), by adding at the end the following 
new subparagraph: 

"(E) If applicable, the plan meets the requirement de- 
scribed in paragraph (7)."; 

(3) in paragraph (4), by adding at the end the following 
new subparagraph: 

"(C) If applicable, the plan meets the requirement de- 
scribed in paragraph (7)."; and 

(4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 

"(7) Authority to require special needs plans be ncqa 
approved. — For 2012 and subsequent years, the Secretary 
shall require that a Medicare Advantage organization offering 
a specialized MA plan for special needs individuals be ap- 
proved by the National Committee for Quality Assurance 
(based on standards established by the Secretary).". 

(f) Risk Adjustment.— Section 1853(a)(1)(C) of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-23(a)(l)(C)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new clause: 

"(hi) Improvements to risk adjustment for spe- 
cial needs individuals with chronic health condi- 
tions. — 

"(I) In general. — For 2011 and subsequent 
years, for purposes of the adjustment under clause 
(i) with respect to individuals described in sub- 
clause (II), the Secretary shall use a risk score 
that reflects the known underlying risk profile 
and chronic health status of similar individuals. 
Such risk score shall be used instead of the de- 
fault risk score for new enrollees in Medicare Ad- 
vantage plans that are not specialized MA plans 
for special needs individuals (as defined in section 
1859(b)(6)). 

"(II) Individuals described. — An individual 
described in this subclause is a special needs indi- 
vidual described in subsection (b)(6)(B)(iii) who 
enrolls in a specialized MA plan for special needs 
individuals on or after January 1, 2011. 

"(Ill) Evaluation. — For 2011 and periodically 
thereafter, the Secretary shall evaluate and revise 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3206 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



376 



the risk adjustment system under this subpara- 
graph in order to, as accurately as possible, ac- 
count for higher medical and care coordination 
costs associated with frailty, individuals with mul- 
tiple, comorbid chronic conditions, and individuals 
with a diagnosis of mental illness, and also to ac- 
count for costs that may be associated with higher 
concentrations of beneficiaries with those condi- 
tions. 

"(IV) Publication of evaluation and revi- 
sions. — The Secretary shall publish, as part of an 
announcement under subsection (b), a description 
of any evaluation conducted under subclause (III) 
during the preceding year and any revisions made 
under such subclause as a result of such evalua- 
tion.". 

(g) Technical Correction— Section 1859(f)(5) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-28(f)(5)) is amended, in the matter 
preceding subparagraph (A), by striking "described in subsection 

(b)(6)(B)(i)". 

SEC. 3206. EXTENSION OF REASONABLE COST CONTRACTS. 

Section 1876(h)(5)(C)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395mm(h)(5)(C)(ii)) is amended, in the matter preceding subclause 
(I), by striking "January 1, 2010" and inserting "January 1, 2013". 

SEC. 3207. TECHNICAL CORRECTION TO MA PRIVATE FEE-FOR-SERV- 
ICE PLANS. 

For plan year 2011 and subsequent plan years, to the extent 
that the Secretary of Health and Human Services is applying the 
2008 service area extension waiver policy (as modified in the April 
11, 2008, Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services' memorandum 
with the subject "2009 Employer Group Waiver-Modification of the 
2008 Service Area Extension Waiver Granted to Certain MA Local 
Coordinated Care Plans") to Medicare Advantage coordinated care 
plans, the Secretary shall extend the application of such waiver 
policy to employers who contract directly with the Secretary as a 
Medicare Advantage private fee-for-service plan under section 
1857(i)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-27(i)(2)) and 
that had enrollment as of October 1, 2009. 

SEC. 3208. MAKING SENIOR HOUSING FACILITY DEMONSTRATION PER- 
MANENT. 

(a) In General. — Section 1859 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395w-28) is amended by adding at the end the following 
new subsection: 

"(g) Special Rules for Senior Housing Facility Plans. — 

"(1) In general. — In the case of a Medicare Advantage 
senior housing facility plan described in paragraph (2), not- 
withstanding any other provision of this part to the contrary 
and in accordance with regulations of the Secretary, the service 
area of such plan may be limited to a senior housing facility 
in a geographic area. 

"(2) Medicare advantage senior housing facility plan 
DESCRIBED. — For purposes of this subsection, a Medicare Ad- 
June 9, 2010 



377 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3210 



vantage senior housing facility plan is a Medicare Advantage 
plan that — 

"(A) restricts enrollment of individuals under this part 
to individuals who reside in a continuing care retirement 
community (as defined in section 1852(1)(4)(B)); 

"(B) provides primary care services onsite and has a 
ratio of accessible physicians to beneficiaries that the Sec- 
retary determines is adequate; 

"(C) provides transportation services for beneficiaries 
to specialty providers outside of the facility; and 

"(D) has participated (as of December 31, 2009) in a 
demonstration project established by the Secretary under 
which such a plan was offered for not less than 1 year.", 
(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by this section 
shall take effect on January 1, 2010, and shall apply to plan years 
beginning on or after such date. 

SEC. 3209. AUTHORITY TO DENY PLAN BIDS. 

(a) In General. — Section 1854(a)(5) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-24(a)(5)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subparagraph: 

"(C) Rejection of bids. — 

"(i) In general. — Nothing in this section shall be 
construed as requiring the Secretary to accept any or 
every bid submitted by an MA organization under this 
subsection. 

"(ii) Authority to deny bids that propose sig- 
nificant INCREASES IN COST SHARING OR DECREASES IN 
BENEFITS. — The Secretary may deny a bid submitted 
by an MA organization for an MA plan if it proposes 
significant increases in cost sharing or decreases in 
benefits offered under the plan.". 

(b) Application Under Part D. — Section 1860D-ll(d) of such 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-lll(d)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph: 

"(3) Rejection of bids. — Paragraph (5)(C) of section 
1854(a) shall apply with respect to bids submitted by a PDP 
sponsor under subsection (b) in the same manner as such para- 
graph applies to bids submitted by an MA organization under 
such section 1854(a).". 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to bids submitted for contract years beginning on or 
after January 1, 2011. 

SEC. 3210. DEVELOPMENT OF NEW STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN 
MEDIGAP PLANS. 

(a) In General. — Section 1882 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395ss) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection: 

"(y) Development of New Standards for Certain Medicare 
Supplemental Policies. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall request the Na- 
tional Association of Insurance Commissioners to review and 
revise the standards for benefit packages described in para- 
graph (2) under subsection (p)(l), to otherwise update stand- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3301 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



378 



ards to include requirements for nominal cost sharing to en- 
courage the use of appropriate physicians' services under part 
B. Such revisions shall be based on evidence published in peer- 
reviewed journals or current examples used by integrated de- 
livery systems and made consistent with the rules applicable 
under subsection (p)(l)(E) with the reference to the '1991 NAIC 
Model Regulation' deemed a reference to the NAIC Model Reg- 
ulation as published in the Federal Register on December 4, 
1998, and as subsequently updated by the National Association 
of Insurance Commissioners to reflect previous changes in law 
and the reference to 'date of enactment of this subsection' 
deemed a reference to the date of enactment of the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. To the extent practicable, 
such revision shall provide for the implementation of revised 
standards for benefit packages as of January 1, 2015. 

"(2) Benefit packages described. — The benefit packages 
described in this paragraph are benefit packages classified as 
'C and 'F'.". 

(b) Conforming Amendment. — Section 1882(o)(l) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ss(o)(l)) is amended by striking ", and 
(w)" and inserting "(w), and (y)". 

Subtitle D — Medicare Part D Improve- 
ments for Prescription Drug Plans and 
MA-PD Plans 

SEC. 3301. MEDICARE COVERAGE GAP DISCOUNT PROGRAM. 

(a) Condition for Coverage of Drugs Under Part D. — Part 
D of Title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-101 
et seq.), is amended by adding at the end the following new section: 

"condition for coverage of drugs under this part 

"Sec. 1860D-43 [42 U.S.C. 1395w-153]. (a) In General.— In 
order for coverage to be available under this part for covered part 
D drugs (as defined in section 1860D-2(e)) of a manufacturer, the 
manufacturer must — 

"(1) participate in the Medicare coverage gap discount pro- 
gram under section 1860D-14A; 

"(2) have entered into and have in effect an agreement de- 
scribed in subsection (b) of such section with the Secretary; 
and 

"(3) have entered into and have in effect, under terms and 
conditions specified by the Secretary, a contract with a third 
party that the Secretary has entered into a contract with 
under subsection (d)(3) of such section. 

"(b) Effective Date. — Subsection (a) shall apply to covered 
part D drugs dispensed under this part on or after January 1, 
2011. [As revised by section 1101(b)(1)(A) of HCERA] 

"(c) Authorizing Coverage for Drugs Not Covered Under 
Agreements. — Subsection (a) shall not apply to the dispensing of 
a covered part D drug if — 

June 9, 2010 



379 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3301M860D-14A SSA 



"(1) the Secretary has made a determination that the 
availability of the drug is essential to the health of bene- 
ficiaries under this part; or 

"(2) the Secretary determines that in the period beginning 
on January 1, 2011, and December 31, 2011, there were ex- 
tenuating circumstances. [As revised by section 1101(b)(1)(B) of 
HCERA\ 

"(d) Definition of Manufacturer. — In this section, the term 
'manufacturer' has the meaning given such term in section 1860D- 
14A(g)(5).". 

(b) Medicare Coverage Gap Discount Program. — Part D of 
title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-101) is 
amended by inserting after section 1860D-14 the following new 
section: 

"medicare coverage gap discount program 

"Sec. 1860D-14A [42 U.S.C. 1395w-114a]. (a) Establish- 
ment. — The Secretary shall establish a Medicare coverage gap dis- 
count program (in this section referred to as the 'program') by not 
later than January 1, 2011. Under the program, the Secretary shall 
enter into agreements described in subsection (b) with manufactur- 
ers and provide for the performance of the duties described in sub- 
section (c)(1). The Secretary shall establish a model agreement for 
use under the program by not later than 180 days after the date 
of the enactment of this section, in consultation with manufactur- 
ers, and allow for comment on such model agreement. [As revised 
by section 1101(b)(2)(A) of HCERA] 
"(b) Terms of Agreement. — 
"(1) In general. — 

"(A) Agreement. — An agreement under this section 
shall require the manufacturer to provide applicable bene- 
ficiaries access to discounted prices for applicable drugs of 
the manufacturer. 

"(B) Provision of discounted prices at the point- 
of-sale. — Except as provided in subsection (c)(l)(A)(iii), 
such discounted prices shall be provided to the applicable 
beneficiary at the pharmacy or by the mail order service 
at the point-of-sale of an applicable drug. 

"(C) Timing of agreement. — [As revised by section 
1011(b)(2)(B) of HCERA] 

"(i) Special rule for 2011. — In order for an agree- 
ment with a manufacturer to be in effect under this 
section with respect to the period beginning on Janu- 
ary 1, 2011, and ending on December 31, 2011, the 
manufacturer shall enter into such agreement not 
later than not later than 30 days after the date of the 
establishment of a model agreement under subsection 
(a). 

"(ii) 2012 and subsequent years. — In order for 
an agreement with a manufacturer to be in effect 
under this section with respect to plan year 2012 or a 
subsequent plan year, the manufacturer shall enter 
into such agreement (or such agreement shall be re- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3301M 8B0D-14A SSA PPACA (Consolidated) 



380 



newed under paragraph (4)(A)) not later than January 
30 of the preceding year. 
"(2) Provision of appropriate data. — Each manufacturer 
with an agreement in effect under this section shall collect and 
have available appropriate data, as determined by the Sec- 
retary, to ensure that it can demonstrate to the Secretary com- 
pliance with the requirements under the program. 

"(3) Compliance with requirements for administration 
of program. — Each manufacturer with an agreement in effect 
under this section shall comply with requirements imposed by 
the Secretary or a third party with a contract under subsection 
(d)(3), as applicable, for purposes of administering the pro- 
gram, including any determination under clause (i) of sub- 
section (c)(1)(A) or procedures established under such sub- 
section (c)(1)(A). 

"(4) Length of agreement. — 

"(A) In general. — An agreement under this section 
shall be effective for an initial period of not less than 18 
months and shall be automatically renewed for a period of 
not less than 1 year unless terminated under subpara- 
graph (B). 

"(B) Termination. — 

"(i) By the secretary. — The Secretary may pro- 
vide for termination of an agreement under this sec- 
tion for a knowing and willful violation of the require- 
ments of the agreement or other good cause shown. 
Such termination shall not be effective earlier than 30 
days after the date of notice to the manufacturer of 
such termination. The Secretary shall provide, upon 
request, a manufacturer with a hearing concerning 
such a termination, and such hearing shall take place 
prior to the effective date of the termination with suf- 
ficient time for such effective date to be repealed if the 
Secretary determines appropriate. 

"(ii) By a manufacturer. — A manufacturer may 
terminate an agreement under this section for any 
reason. Any such termination shall be effective, with 
respect to a plan year — 

"(I) if the termination occurs before January 
30 of a plan year, as of the day after the end of 
the plan year; and 

"(II) if the termination occurs on or after Jan- 
uary 30 of a plan year, as of the day after the end 
of the succeeding plan year. 

"(hi) Effectiveness of termination. — Any ter- 
mination under this subparagraph shall not affect dis- 
counts for applicable drugs of the manufacturer that 
are due under the agreement before the effective date 
of its termination. 

"(iv) Notice to third party. — The Secretary shall 
provide notice of such termination to a third party 
with a contract under subsection (d)(3) within not less 
than 30 days before the effective date of such termi- 
nation. 

June 9, 2010 



381 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3301M860D-14A SSA 



"(c) Duties Described and Special Rule for Supplemental 
Benefits. — 

"(1) Duties described. — The duties described in this sub- 
section are the following: 

"(A) Administration of program. — Administering the 
program, including — 

"(i) the determination of the amount of the dis- 
counted price of an applicable drug of a manufacturer; 

"(ii) except as provided in clause (iii), the estab- 
lishment of procedures under which discounted prices 
are provided to applicable beneficiaries at pharmacies 
or by mail order service at the point-of-sale of an ap- 
plicable drug; 

"(iii) in the case where, during the period begin- 
ning on January 1, 2011, and ending on December 31, 
2011, it is not practicable to provide such discounted 
prices at the point-of-sale (as described in clause (ii)), 
the establishment of procedures to provide such dis- 
counted prices as soon as practicable after the point- 
of-sale; [As revised by section 1011(b)(2)(C)(i) of 
HCERAi 

"(iv) the establishment of procedures to ensure 
that, not later than the applicable number of calendar 
days after the dispensing of an applicable drug by a 
pharmacy or mail order service, the pharmacy or mail 
order service is reimbursed for an amount equal to the 
difference between — 

"(I) the negotiated price of the applicable 

drug; and 

"(II) the discounted price of the applicable 
drug; 

"(v) the establishment of procedures to ensure 
that the discounted price for an applicable drug under 
this section is applied before any coverage or financial 
assistance under other health benefit plans or pro- 
grams that provide coverage or financial assistance for 
the purchase or provision of prescription drug cov- 
erage on behalf of applicable beneficiaries as the Sec- 
retary may specify; 

"(vi) the establishment of procedures to implement 
the special rule for supplemental benefits under para- 
graph (2); and 

"(vii) providing a reasonable dispute resolution 
mechanism to resolve disagreements between manu- 
facturers, applicable beneficiaries, and the third party 
with a contract under subsection (d)(3). 
"(B) Monitoring compliance. — 

"(i) In general. — The Secretary shall monitor 
compliance by a manufacturer with the terms of an 
agreement under this section. 

"(ii) Notification. — If a third party with a con- 
tract under subsection (d)(3) determines that the man- 
ufacturer is not in compliance with such agreement, 
the third party shall notify the Secretary of such non- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3301M 8B0D-14A SSA PPACA (Consolidated) 



382 



compliance for appropriate enforcement under sub- 
section (e). 

"(C) Collection of data from prescription drug 
plans and ma-pd plans. — The Secretary may collect ap- 
propriate data from prescription drug plans and MA-PD 
plans in a timeframe that allows for discounted prices to 
be provided for applicable drugs under this section. 
"(2) Special rule for supplemental benefits. — For plan 
year 2011 and each subsequent plan year, in the case where 
an applicable beneficiary has supplemental benefits with re- 
spect to applicable drugs under the prescription drug plan or 
MA-PD plan that the applicable beneficiary is enrolled in, the 
applicable beneficiary shall not be provided a discounted price 
for an applicable drug under this section until after such sup- 
plemental benefits have been applied with respect to the appli- 
cable drug. [As revised by section 1011(b)(2)(C)(ii) of HCERA] 
"(d) Administration. — 

"(1) In general. — Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary 
shall provide for the implementation of this section, including 
the performance of the duties described in subsection (c)(1). 
"(2) Limitation. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (B), in pro- 
viding for such implementation, the Secretary shall not re- 
ceive or distribute any funds of a manufacturer under the 
program. 

"(B) Exception. — The limitation under subparagraph 
(A) shall not apply to the Secretary with respect to drugs 
dispensed during the period beginning on January 1, 2011, 
and ending on December 31, 2011, but only if the Sec- 
retary determines that the exception to such limitation 
under this subparagraph is necessary in order for the Sec- 
retary to begin implementation of this section and provide 
applicable beneficiaries timely access to discounted prices 
during such period. [As revised by section 1011(b)(2)(D) of 
HCERA] 

"(3) Contract with third parties. — The Secretary shall 
enter into a contract with 1 or more third parties to administer 
the requirements established by the Secretary in order to carry 
out this section. At a minimum, the contract with a third party 
under the preceding sentence shall require that the third 
party— 

"(A) receive and transmit information between the 
Secretary, manufacturers, and other individuals or entities 
the Secretary determines appropriate; 

"(B) receive, distribute, or facilitate the distribution of 
funds of manufacturers to appropriate individuals or enti- 
ties in order to meet the obligations of manufacturers 
under agreements under this section; 

"(C) provide adequate and timely information to man- 
ufacturers, consistent with the agreement with the manu- 
facturer under this section, as necessary for the manufac- 
turer to fulfill its obligations under this section; and 

"(D) permit manufacturers to conduct periodic audits, 
directly or through contracts, of the data and information 

June 9, 2010 



383 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3301U 8600-1 4A SSA 



used by the third party to determine discounts for applica- 
ble drugs of the manufacturer under the program. 
"(4) Performance requirements. — The Secretary shall 
establish performance requirements for a third party with a 
contract under paragraph (3) and safeguards to protect the 
independence and integrity of the activities carried out by the 
third party under the program under this section. 

"(5) Implementation. — The Secretary may implement the 
program under this section by program instruction or other- 
wise. 

"(6) Administration. — Chapter 35 of title 44, United 
States Code, shall not apply to the program under this section. 
"(e) Enforcement. — 

"(1) Audits. — Each manufacturer with an agreement in ef- 
fect under this section shall be subject to periodic audit by the 
Secretary. 

"(2) Civil money penalty. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall impose a civil 
money penalty on a manufacturer that fails to provide ap- 
plicable beneficiaries discounts for applicable drugs of the 
manufacturer in accordance with such agreement for each 
such failure in an amount the Secretary determines is 
commensurate with the sum of — 

"(i) the amount that the manufacturer would have 
paid with respect to such discounts under the agree- 
ment, which will then be used to pay the discounts 
which the manufacturer had failed to provide; and 

"(ii) 25 percent of such amount. 
"(B) Application. — The provisions of section 1128 A 
(other than subsections (a) and (b)) shall apply to a civil 
money penalty under this paragraph in the same manner 
as such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding under 
section 1128A(a). 
"(f) Clarification Regarding Availability of Other Cov- 
ered Part D Drugs. — Nothing in this section shall prevent an ap- 
plicable beneficiary from purchasing a covered part D drug that is 
not an applicable drug (including a generic drug or a drug that is 
not on the formulary of the prescription drug plan or MA-PD plan 
that the applicable beneficiary is enrolled in). 
"(g) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(1) Applicable beneficiary. — The term 'applicable bene- 
ficiary' means an individual who, on the date of dispensing a 
covered part D drug — [As revised by section 1101(b)(2)(E) of 
HCERA\ 

"(A) is enrolled in a prescription drug plan or an MA- 
PD plan; 

"(B) is not enrolled in a qualified retiree prescription 
drug plan; 

"(C) is not entitled to an income-related subsidy under 
section 1860D-14(a); and 
{previous subparagraph (D) stricken by section 1101(b)(2)(E) of 
HCERA] 

"(D) who— 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3301M 8B0D-14A SSA PPACA (Consolidated) 



384 



"(i) has reached or exceeded the initial coverage 
limit under section 1860D-2(b)(3) during the year; and 
"(ii) has not incurred costs for covered part D 
drugs in the year equal to the annual out-of-pocket 
threshold specified in section 1860D-2(b)(4)(B). 
"(2) Applicable drug. — The term 'applicable drug 5 means, 
with respect to an applicable beneficiary, a covered part D 
drug — 

"(A) approved under a new drug application under sec- 
tion 505(b) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or, 
in the case of a biologic product, licensed under section 351 
of the Public Health Service Act (other than a product li- 
censed under subsection (k) of such section 351); and 

"(B)(i) if the PDP sponsor of the prescription drug plan 
or the MA organization offering the MA-PD plan uses a 
formulary, which is on the formulary of the prescription 
drug plan or MA-PD plan that the applicable beneficiary 
is enrolled in; 

"(ii) if the PDP sponsor of the prescription drug plan 
or the MA organization offering the MA-PD plan does not 
use a formulary, for which benefits are available under the 
prescription drug plan or MA-PD plan that the applicable 
beneficiary is enrolled in; or 

"(hi) is provided through an exception or appeal. 
"(3) Applicable number of calendar days. — The term 
'applicable number of calendar days' means — 

"(A) with respect to claims for reimbursement sub- 
mitted electronically, 14 days; and 

"(B) with respect to claims for reimbursement sub- 
mitted otherwise, 30 days. 
"(4) Discounted price. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'discounted price' means 
50 percent of the negotiated price of the applicable drug of 
a manufacturer. 

"(B) Clarification. — Nothing in this section shall be 
construed as affecting the responsibility of an applicable 
beneficiary for payment of a dispensing fee for an applica- 
ble drug. 

"(C) Special case for certain claims. — In the case 
where the entire amount of the negotiated price of an indi- 
vidual claim for an applicable drug with respect to an ap- 
plicable beneficiary does not fall at or above the initial cov- 
erage limit under section 1860D-2(b)(3) and below the an- 
nual out-of-pocket threshold specified in section 1860D- 
2(b)(4)(B) for the year, the manufacturer of the applicable 
drug shall provide the discounted price under this section 
on only the portion of the negotiated price of the applicable 
drug that falls at or above such initial coverage limit and 
below such annual out-of-pocket threshold. 
"(5) Manufacturer. — The term 'manufacturer' means any 
entity which is engaged in the production, preparation, propa- 
gation, compounding, conversion, or processing of prescription 
drug products, either directly or indirectly by extraction from 
substances of natural origin, or independently by means of 

June 9, 2010 



385 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3301 



chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and 
chemical synthesis. Such term does not include a wholesale 
distributor of drugs or a retail pharmacy licensed under State 
law. 

"(6) Negotiated price. — The term 'negotiated price' has 
the meaning given such term in section 423.100 of title 42, 
Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on the date of enact- 
ment of this section), except that such negotiated price shall 
not include any dispensing fee for the applicable drug. 

"(7) Qualified retiree prescription drug plan. — The 
term 'qualified retiree prescription drug plan' has the meaning 
given such term in section 1860D-22(a)(2).". 

(c) Inclusion in Incurred Costs. — 

(1) In general.— Section 1860D-2(b)(4) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-102(b)(4)) is amended— 

(A) in subparagraph (C), in the matter preceding 
clause (i), by striking "In applying" and inserting "Except 
as provided in subparagraph (E), in applying"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new subpara- 
graph: 

"(E) Inclusion of costs of applicable drugs under 

MEDICARE COVERAGE GAP DISCOUNT PROGRAM. — In applying 

subparagraph (A), incurred costs shall include the nego- 
tiated price (as denned in paragraph (6) of section 1860D- 
14A(g)) of an applicable drug (as defined in paragraph (2) 
of such section) of a manufacturer that is furnished to an 
applicable beneficiary (as defined in paragraph (1) of such 
section) under the Medicare coverage gap discount pro- 
gram under section 1860D-14A, regardless of whether part 
of such costs were paid by a manufacturer under such pro- 
gram, except that incurred costs shall not include the por- 
tion of the negotiated price that represents the reduction 
in coinsurance resulting from the application of paragraph 

(2) (D). [As revised by section 1101(b)(3)(E) ofHCERAY. 

(2) Effective date. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section shall apply to costs incurred on or after July 1, 2010. 
{Section 1101(b)(3) of HCERA amended section 1860D-2(b)(2) 

of the SSA to add subparagraphs (C) and (D) that provide coverage 
for generic drugs and applicable drugs in the coverage gap; and sec- 
tion 1101(b)(4) of HCERA amends section 1860D-22(a)(2)(A) in re- 
lation to not taking into account value of discounts or coverage in 
gap] 

{Section 1101(d) of HCERA amended section 1860D- 
2(b)(4)(B)(i) and (7) of SSA to reduce growth rate of out-of-pocket 
cost threshold] 

(d) Conforming Amendment Permitting Prescription Drug 
Discounts. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1128B(b)(3) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7b(b)(3)) is amended— 

(A) by striking "and" at the end of subparagraph (G); 

(B) in the subparagraph (H) added by section 237(d) of 
the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Mod- 
ernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173; 117 Stat. 
2213)— 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3302 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



386 



(i) by moving such subparagraph 2 ems to the left; 

and 

(ii) by striking the period at the end and inserting 
a semicolon; 

(C) in the subparagraph (H) added by section 431(a) of 
such Act (117 Stat. 2287)— 

(i) by redesignating such subparagraph as sub- 
paragraph (I); 

(ii) by moving such subparagraph 2 ems to the 
left; and 

(iii) by striking the period at the end and inserting 
"; and"; and 

(D) by adding at the end the following new subpara- 
graph: 

"(J) a discount in the price of an applicable drug (as 
defined in paragraph (2) of section 1860D-14A(g)) of a 
manufacturer that is furnished to an applicable beneficiary 
(as defined in paragraph (1) of such section) under the 
Medicare coverage gap discount program under section 
1860D-14A.". 

(2) Conforming amendment to definition of best price 
under medicaid.— Section 1927(c)(l)(C)(i)(VI) of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(c)(l)(C)(i)(VI)) is amended by in- 
serting ", or any discounts provided by manufacturers under 
the Medicare coverage gap discount program under section 
1860D-14A" before the period at the end. 

(3) Effective date. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section shall apply to drugs dispensed on or after July 1, 2010. 

SEC. 3302. IMPROVEMENT IN DETERMINATION OF MEDICARE PART D 
LOW-INCOME BENCHMARK PREMIUM. 

(a) In General.— Section 1860D-14(b)(2)(B)(iii) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-114(b)(2)(B)(iii)) is amended by in- 
serting "and determined before the application of the monthly re- 
bate computed under section 1854(b)(l)(C)(i) for that plan and year 
involved and, in the case of a qualifying plan, before the applica- 
tion of the increase under section 1853(o) for that plan and year 
involved" before the period at the end. [As revised by section 
1103(c) of HCERA] 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by subsection (a) 
shall apply to premiums for months beginning on or after January 
1, 2011. 

SEC. 3303. VOLUNTARY DE MINIMIS POLICY FOR SUBSIDY ELIGIBLE 
INDP7IDUALS UNDER PRESCRIPTION DRUG PLANS AND 
MA-PD PLANS. 

(a) In General. — Section 1860D-14(a) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-114(a)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph: 

"(5) Waiver of de minimis premiums. — The Secretary 
shall, under procedures established by the Secretary, permit a 
prescription drug plan or an MA-PD plan to waive the month- 
ly beneficiary premium for a subsidy eligible individual if the 
amount of such premium is de minimis. If such premium is 
waived under the plan, the Secretary shall not reassign sub- 
sidy eligible individuals enrolled in the plan to other plans 

June 9, 2010 



387 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3305 



based on the fact that the monthly beneficiary premium under 
the plan was greater than the low-income benchmark premium 
amount.". 

(b) Authorizing the Secretary To Auto-enroll Subsidy 
Eligible Individuals in Plans That Waive De Minimis Pre- 
miums.— Section 1860D-l(b)(l) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395w-101(b)(l)) is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (C), by inserting "except as provided 
in subparagraph (D)," after "shall include," 

(2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: 

"(D) Special rule for plans that waive de minimis 
premiums. — The process established under subparagraph 
(A) may include, in the case of a part D eligible individual 
who is a subsidy eligible individual (as defined in section 
1860D-14(a)(3)) who has failed to enroll in a prescription 
drug plan or an MA-PD plan, for the enrollment in a pre- 
scription drug plan or MA-PD plan that has waived the 
monthly beneficiary premium for such subsidy eligible in- 
dividual under section 1860D-14(a)(5). If there is more 
than one such plan available, the Secretary shall enroll 
such an individual under the preceding sentence on a ran- 
dom basis among all such plans in the PDP region. Noth- 
ing in the previous sentence shall prevent such an indi- 
vidual from declining or changing such enrollment.". 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section shall apply to premiums for months, and enrollments for 
plan years, beginning on or after January 1, 2011. 

SEC. 3304. SPECIAL RULE FOR WIDOWS AND WIDOWERS REGARDING 
ELIGIBILITY FOR low-income ASSISTANCE. 

(a) In General.— Section 1860D-14(a)(3)(B) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-l 14(a)(3)(B)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new clause: 

"(vi) Special rule for widows and widowers. — 
Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this sub- 
paragraph, in the case of an individual whose spouse 
dies during the effective period for a determination or 
redetermination that has been made under this sub- 
paragraph, such effective period shall be extended 
through the date that is 1 year after the date on which 
the determination or redetermination would (but for 
the application of this clause) otherwise cease to be ef- 
fective.". 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by subsection (a) 
shall take effect on January 1, 2011. 

SEC. 3305. IMPROVED INFORMATION FOR SUBSIDY ELIGIBLE INDD7ID- 
UALS REASSIGNED TO PRESCRIPTION DRUG plans AND 
MA-PD PLANS. 

Section 1860D-14 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w- 
114) is amended — 

(1) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (e); and 

(2) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new sub- 
section: 

"(d) Facilitation of Reassicnments. — Beginning not later 
than January 1, 2011, the Secretary shall, in the case of a subsidy 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3306 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



388 



eligible individual who is enrolled in one prescription drug plan 
and is subsequently reassigned by the Secretary to a new prescrip- 
tion drug plan, provide the individual, within 30 days of such reas- 
signment, with — 

"(1) information on formulary differences between the indi- 
vidual's former plan and the plan to which the individual is re- 
assigned with respect to the individual's drug regimens; and 

"(2) a description of the individual's right to request a cov- 
erage determination, exception, or reconsideration under sec- 
tion 1860D-4(g), bring an appeal under section 1860D-4(h), or 
resolve a grievance under section 1860D-4(f).". 

SEC. 3306. FUNDING OUTREACH AND ASSISTANCE FOR LOW-INCOME 
PROGRAMS. 

(a) Additional Funding for State Health Insurance Pro- 
grams. — Subsection (a)(1)(B) of section 119 of the Medicare Im- 
provements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 (42 U.S.C. 
1395b-3 note) is amended by striking "(42 U.S.C. 1395w-23(f))" 
and all that follows through the period at the end and inserting 
"(42 U.S.C. 1395w-23(f)), to the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid 
Services Program Management Account — 

"(i) for fiscal year 2009, of $7,500,000; and 
"(ii) for the period of fiscal years 2010 through 
2012, of $15,000,000. 
Amounts appropriated under this subparagraph shall re- 
main available until expended.". 

(b) Additional Funding for Area Agencies on Aging. — Sub- 
section (b)(1)(B) of such section 119 is amended by striking "(42 
U.S.C. 1395w-23(f))" and all that follows through the period at the 
end and inserting "(42 U.S.C. 1395w-23(f)), to the Administration 
on Aging — 

"(i) for fiscal year 2009, of $7,500,000; and 
"(ii) for the period of fiscal years 2010 through 
2012, of $15,000,000. 
Amounts appropriated under this subparagraph shall re- 
main available until expended.". 

(c) Additional Funding for Aging and Disability Resource 
Centers. — Subsection (c)(1)(B) of such section 119 is amended by 
striking "(42 U.S.C. 1395w-23(f))" and all that follows through the 
period at the end and inserting "(42 U.S.C. 1395w-23(f)), to the Ad- 
ministration on Aging — 

"(i) for fiscal year 2009, of $5,000,000; and 
"(ii) for the period of fiscal years 2010 through 
2012, of $10,000,000. 
Amounts appropriated under this subparagraph shall re- 
main available until expended.". 

(d) Additional Funding for Contract With the National 
Center for Benefits and Outreach Enrollment. — Subsection 
(d)(2) of such section 119 is amended by striking "(42 U.S.C. 
1395w-23(f))" and all that follows through the period at the end 
and inserting "(42 U.S.C. 1395w-23(f)), to the Administration on 
Aging — 

"(i) for fiscal year 2009, of $5,000,000; and 
"(ii) for the period of fiscal years 2010 through 
2012, of $5,000,000. 

June 9, 2010 



389 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3307 



Amounts appropriated under this subparagraph shall re- 
main available until expended.", 
(e) Secretarial Authority To Enlist Support in Con- 
ducting Certain Outreach Activities. — Such section 119 is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: 

"(g) Secretarial Authority To Enlist Support in Con- 
ducting Certain Outreach Activities. — The Secretary may re- 
quest that an entity awarded a grant under this section support 
the conduct of outreach activities aimed at preventing disease and 
promoting wellness. Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
section, an entity may use a grant awarded under this subsection 
to support the conduct of activities described in the preceding sen- 
tence.". 

SEC. 3307. IMPROVING FORMULARY REQUIREMENTS FOR PRESCRIP- 
TION DRUG PLANS AND MA-PD PLANS WITH RESPECT TO 
CERTAIN CATEGORIES OR CLASSES OF DRUGS. 

(a) Improving Formulary Requirements. — Section 1860D- 
4(b)(3)(G) of the Social Security Act is amended to read as follows: 
"(G) Required inclusion of drugs in certain cat- 
egories AND CLASSES. — 

"(i) Formulary requirements. — 

"(I) In general. — Subject to subclause (II), a 
PDP sponsor offering a prescription drug plan 
shall be required to include all covered part D 
drugs in the categories and classes identified by 
the Secretary under clause (ii)(I). 

"(II) Exceptions. — The Secretary may estab- 
lish exceptions that permit a PDP sponsor offering 
a prescription drug plan to exclude from its for- 
mulary a particular covered part D drug in a cat- 
egory or class that is otherwise required to be in- 
cluded in the formulary under subclause (I) (or to 
otherwise limit access to such a drug, including 
through prior authorization or utilization manage- 
ment). 

"(ii) Identification of drugs in certain cat- 
egories AND CLASSES. — 

"(I) In general. — Subject to clause (iv), the 
Secretary shall identify, as appropriate, categories 
and classes of drugs for which the Secretary deter- 
mines are of clinical concern. 

"(II) Criteria. — The Secretary shall use cri- 
teria established by the Secretary in making any 
determination under subclause (I), 
"(hi) Implementation. — The Secretary shall es- 
tablish the criteria under clause (ii)(II) and any excep- 
tions under clause (i)(II) through the promulgation of 
a regulation which includes a public notice and com- 
ment period. 

"(iv) Requirement for certain categories and 

CLASSES UNTIL CRITERIA ESTABLISHED. — Until Such 

time as the Secretary establishes the criteria under 
clause (ii)(II) the following categories and classes of 
drugs shall be identified under clause (h)(1): 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3308 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



390 



"(I) Anticonvulsants. 
"(II) Antidepressants. 
"(Ill) Antineoplastics. 
"(IV) Antipsychotics. 
"(V) Antiretrovirals. 

"(VI) Immunosuppressants for the treatment 
of transplant rejection.", 
(b) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to plan year 2011 and subsequent plan years. 

SEC. 3308. REDUCING PART D PREMIUM SUBSIDY FOR HIGH-INCOME 
BENEFICIARIES. 

(a) Income-Related Increase in Part D Premium. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1860D-13(a) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-113(a)) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new paragraph: 

"(7) Increase in base beneficiary premium based on in- 
come. — 

"(A) In general. — In the case of an individual whose 
modified adjusted gross income exceeds the threshold 
amount applicable under paragraph (2) of section 1839(i) 
(including application of paragraph (5) of such section) for 
the calendar year, the monthly amount of the beneficiary 
premium applicable under this section for a month after 
December 2010 shall be increased by the monthly adjust- 
ment amount specified in subparagraph (B). 

"(B) Monthly adjustment amount. — The monthly 
adjustment amount specified in this subparagraph for an 
individual for a month in a year is equal to the product 
of— 

"(i) the quotient obtained by dividing — 

"(I) the applicable percentage determined 
under paragraph (3)(C) of section 1839(i) (includ- 
ing application of paragraph (5) of such section) 
for the individual for the calendar year reduced by 
25.5 percent; by 

"(II) 25.5 percent; and 
"(ii) the base beneficiary premium (as computed 
under paragraph (2)). 

"(C) Modified adjusted gross income. — For pur- 
poses of this paragraph, the term 'modified adjusted gross 
income' has the meaning given such term in subparagraph 
(A) of section 1839(i)(4), determined for the taxable year 
applicable under subparagraphs (B) and (C) of such sec- 
tion. 

"(D) Determination by commissioner of social se- 
curity. — The Commissioner of Social Security shall make 
any determination necessary to carry out the income-re- 
lated increase in the base beneficiary premium under this 
paragraph. 

"(E) Procedures to assure correct income-re- 
lated INCREASE IN BASE BENEFICIARY PREMIUM. — 

"(i) Disclosure of base beneficiary premium. — 
Not later than September 15 of each year beginning 
with 2010, the Secretary shall disclose to the Commis- 

June 9, 2010 



391 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3308 



sioner of Social Security the amount of the base bene- 
ficiary premium (as computed under paragraph (2)) for 
the purpose of carrying out the income-related in- 
crease in the base beneficiary premium under this 
paragraph with respect to the following year. 

"(ii) Additional disclosure. — Not later than Oc- 
tober 15 of each year beginning with 2010, the Sec- 
retary shall disclose to the Commissioner of Social Se- 
curity the following information for the purpose of car- 
rying out the income-related increase in the base bene- 
ficiary premium under this paragraph with respect to 
the following year: 

"(I) The modified adjusted gross income 
threshold applicable under paragraph (2) of sec- 
tion 1839(i) (including application of paragraph (5) 
of such section). 

"(II) The applicable percentage determined 
under paragraph (3)(C) of section 1839(i) (includ- 
ing application of paragraph (5) of such section). 

"(Ill) The monthly adjustment amount speci- 
fied in subparagraph (B). 

"(IV) Any other information the Commissioner 
of Social Security determines necessary to carry 
out the income-related increase in the base bene- 
ficiary premium under this paragraph. 
"(F) Rule of construction. — The formula used to de- 
termine the monthly adjustment amount specified under 
subparagraph (B) shall only be used for the purpose of de- 
termining such monthly adjustment amount under such 
subparagraph.". 

(2) Collection of monthly adjustment amount. — Sec- 
tion 1860D-13(c) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w- 
113(c)) is amended — 

(A) in paragraph (1), by striking "(2) and (3)" and in- 
serting "(2), (3), and (4)"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 
"(4) Collection of monthly adjustment amount. — 

"(A) In general. — Notwithstanding any provision of 
this subsection or section 1854(d)(2), subject to subpara- 
graph (B), the amount of the income-related increase in 
the base beneficiary premium for an individual for a 
month (as determined under subsection (a)(7)) shall be 
paid through withholding from benefit payments in the 
manner provided under section 1840. 

"(B) Agreements. — In the case where the monthly 
benefit payments of an individual that are withheld under 
subparagraph (A) are insufficient to pay the amount de- 
scribed in such subparagraph, the Commissioner of Social 
Security shall enter into agreements with the Secretary, 
the Director of the Office of Personnel Management, and 
the Railroad Retirement Board as necessary in order to 
allow other agencies to collect the amount described in 
subparagraph (A) that was not withheld under such sub- 
paragraph.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3308 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



392 



(b) Conforming Amendments. — 

(1) Medicare.— Section 1860D-13(a)(l) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-l 13(a)(1)) is amended— 

(A) by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subpara- 
graph (G); 

(B) in subparagraph (G), as redesignated by subpara- 
graph (A), by striking "(D) and (E)" and inserting "(D), (E), 
and (F)"; and 

(C) by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following 
new subparagraph: 

"(F) Increase based on income. — The monthly bene- 
ficiary premium shall be increased pursuant to paragraph 
(7).". 

(2) Internal revenue code. — Section 6103(1)(20) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to disclosure of return 
information to carry out Medicare part B premium subsidy ad- 
justment) is amended — 

(A) in the heading, by inserting "AND PART D BASE 
beneficiary premium increase" after "part b premium 
subsidy adjustment"; 

(B) in subparagraph (A) — 

(i) in the matter preceding clause (i), by inserting 
"or increase under section 1860D-13(a)(7)" after 
"1839(i)"; and 

(ii) in clause (vii), by inserting after "subsection (i) 
of such section" the following: "or increase under sec- 
tion 1860D-13(a)(7) of such Act"; and 

(C) in subparagraph (B) — 

(i) by striking "Return information" and inserting 
the following: 

"(i) In general. — Return information"; 

(ii) by inserting "or increase under such section 
1860D-13(a)(7)" before the period at the end; 

(hi) as amended by clause (i), by inserting "or for 
the purpose of resolving taxpayer appeals with respect 
to any such premium adjustment or increase" before 
the period at the end; and 

(iv) by adding at the end the following new clause: 
"(ii) Disclosure to other agencies. — Officers, 
employees, and contractors of the Social Security Ad- 
ministration may disclose — 

"(I) the taxpayer identity information and the 
amount of the premium subsidy adjustment or 
premium increase with respect to a taxpayer de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A) to officers, employees, 
and contractors of the Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services, to the extent that such disclo- 
sure is necessary for the collection of the premium 
subsidy amount or the increased premium 
amount, 

"(II) the taxpayer identity information and the 
amount of the premium subsidy adjustment or the 
increased premium amount with respect to a tax- 
payer described in subparagraph (A) to officers 

June 9, 2010 



393 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3310 



and employees of the Office of Personnel Manage- 
ment and the Railroad Retirement Board, to the 
extent that such disclosure is necessary for the 
collection of the premium subsidy amount or the 
increased premium amount, 

"(III) return information with respect to a tax- 
payer described in subparagraph (A) to officers 
and employees of the Department of Health and 
Human Services to the extent necessary to resolve 
administrative appeals of such premium subsidy 
adjustment or increased premium, and 

"(IV) return information with respect to a tax- 
payer described in subparagraph (A) to officers 
and employees of the Department of Justice for 
use in judicial proceedings to the extent necessary 
to carry out the purposes described in clause (i).". 

SEC. 3309. ELIMINATION OF COST SHARING FOR CERTAIN DUAL ELIGI- 
BLE INDIVIDUALS. 

Section 1860D-14(a)(l)(D)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395w-114(a)(l)(D)(i)) is amended by inserting "or, effective 
on a date specified by the Secretary (but in no case earlier than 
January 1, 2012), who would be such an institutionalized indi- 
vidual or couple, if the full-benefit dual eligible individual were not 
receiving services under a home and community-based waiver au- 
thorized for a State under section 1115 or subsection (c) or (d) of 
section 1915 or under a State plan amendment under subsection (i) 
of such section or services provided through enrollment in a med- 
icaid managed care organization with a contract under section 
1903(m) or under section 1932" after "1902(q)(l)(B))". 

SEC. 3310. REDUCING WASTEFUL DISPENSING OF OUTPATIENT PRE- 
SCRIPTION DRUGS IN LONG-TERM CARE FACILITIES 
UNDER PRESCRIPTION DRUG PLANS AND MA-PD PLANS. 

(a) In General. — Section 1860D-4(c) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-104(c)) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new paragraph: 

"(3) Reducing wasteful dispensing of outpatient pre- 
scription drugs in long-term care facilities. — The Sec- 
retary shall require PDP sponsors of prescription drug plans to 
utilize specific, uniform dispensing techniques, as determined 
by the Secretary, in consultation with relevant stakeholders 
(including representatives of nursing facilities, residents of 
nursing facilities, pharmacists, the pharmacy industry (includ- 
ing retail and long-term care pharmacy), prescription drug 
plans, MA-PD plans, and any other stakeholders the Secretary 
determines appropriate), such as weekly, daily, or automated 
dose dispensing, when dispensing covered part D drugs to en- 
rollees who reside in a long-term care facility in order to re- 
duce waste associated with 30-day fills.". 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by subsection (a) 
shall apply to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2012. 



Sec. 3311 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



394 



SEC. 3311 [42 U.S.C. 1395w-154]. IMPROVED MEDICARE PRESCRIPTION 
DRUG PLAN AND MA-PD PLAN COMPLAINT SYSTEM. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary shall develop and maintain a 
complaint system, that is widely known and easy to use, to collect 
and maintain information on MA-PD plan and prescription drug 
plan complaints that are received (including by telephone, letter, e- 
mail, or any other means) by the Secretary (including by a regional 
office of the Department of Health and Human Services, the Medi- 
care Beneficiary Ombudsman, a subcontractor, a carrier, a fiscal 
intermediary, and a Medicare administrative contractor under sec- 
tion 1874A of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395kk)) through 
the date on which the complaint is resolved. The system shall be 
able to report and initiate appropriate interventions and moni- 
toring based on substantial complaints and to guide quality im- 
provement. 

(b) Model Electronic Complaint Form. — The Secretary 
shall develop a model electronic complaint form to be used for re- 
porting plan complaints under the system. Such form shall be 
prominently displayed on the front page of the Medicare.gov Inter- 
net website and on the Internet website of the Medicare Bene- 
ficiary Ombudsman. 

(c) Annual Reports by the Secretary. — The Secretary shall 
submit to Congress annual reports on the system. Such reports 
shall include an analysis of the number and types of complaints re- 
ported in the system, geographic variations in such complaints, the 
timeliness of agency or plan responses to such complaints, and the 
resolution of such complaints. 

(d) Definitions. — In this section: 

(1) MA-PD plan.— The term "MA-PD plan" has the mean- 
ing given such term in section 1860D-41(a)(9) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395w-15 1(a)(9)). 

(2) Prescription drug plan. — The term "prescription 
drug plan" has the meaning given such term in section 1860D- 
41(a)(14) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-151(a)(14)). 

(3) Secretary. — The term "Secretary" means the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services. 

(4) System. — The term "system" means the plan complaint 
system developed and maintained under subsection (a). 

SEC. 3312. UNIFORM EXCEPTIONS AND APPEALS PROCESS FOR PRE- 
SCRIPTION DRUG PLANS AND MA-PD PLANS. 

(a) In General.— Section 1860D-4(b)(3) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-104(b)(3)) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new subparagraph: 

"(H) Use of single, uniform exceptions and ap- 
peals PROCESS. — Notwithstanding any other provision of 
this part, each PDP sponsor of a prescription drug plan 
shall— 

"(i) use a single, uniform exceptions and appeals 
process (including, to the extent the Secretary deter- 
mines feasible, a single, uniform model form for use 
under such process) with respect to the determination 
of prescription drug coverage for an enrollee under the 
plan; and 

June 9, 2010 



395 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3313 



"(ii) provide instant access to such process by en- 
rollees through a toll-free telephone number and an 
Internet website.", 
(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by subsection (a) 
shall apply to exceptions and appeals on or after January 1, 2012. 

SEC. 3313 [42 U.S.C. 1395w-101 note]. OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GEN- 
ERAL STUDIES AND REPORTS. 

(a) Study and Annual Report on Part D Formularies' In- 
clusion of Drugs Commonly Used by Dual Eligibles. — 

(1) Study. — The Inspector General of the Department of 
Health and Human Services shall conduct a study of the extent 
to which formularies used by prescription drug plans and MA- 
PD plans under part D include drugs commonly used by full- 
benefit dual eligible individuals (as defined in section 
1935(c)(6) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-5(c)(6))). 

(2) Annual reports. — Not later than July 1 of each year 
(beginning with 2011), the Inspector General shall submit to 
Congress a report on the study conducted under paragraph (1), 
together with such recommendations as the Inspector General 
determines appropriate. 

(b) Study and Report on Prescription Drug Prices Under 
Medicare Part D and Medicaid. — 

(1) Study. — 

(A) In general. — The Inspector General of the De- 
partment of Health and Human Services shall conduct a 
study on prices for covered part D drugs under the Medi- 
care prescription drug program under part D of title XVIII 
of the Social Security Act and for covered outpatient drugs 
under title XIX. Such study shall include the following: 

(i) A comparison, with respect to the 200 most fre- 
quently dispensed covered part D drugs under such 
program and covered outpatient drugs under such title 
(as determined by the Inspector General based on vol- 
ume and expenditures), of — 

(I) the prices paid for covered part D drugs by 
PDP sponsors of prescription drug plans and 
Medicare Advantage organizations offering MA- 
PD plans; and 

(II) the prices paid for covered outpatient 
drugs by a State plan under title XIX. 

(ii) An assessment of — 

(I) the financial impact of any discrepancies in 
such prices on the Federal Government; and 

(II) the financial impact of any such discrep- 
ancies on enrollees under part D or individuals el- 
igible for medical assistance under a State plan 
under title XIX. 

(B) Price. — For purposes of subparagraph (A), the 
price of a covered part D drug or a covered outpatient drug 
shall include any rebate or discount under such program 
or such title, respectively, including any negotiated price 
concession described in section 1860D-2(d)(l)(B) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-102(d)(l)(B)) or rebate 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3314 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



396 



under an agreement under section 1927 of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8). 

(C) Authority to collect any necessary informa- 
tion. — Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the In- 
spector General of the Department of Health and Human 
Services shall be able to collect any information related to 
the prices of covered part D drugs under such program and 
covered outpatient drugs under such title XIX necessary to 
carry out the comparison under subparagraph (A). 

(2) Report. — 

(A) In general. — Not later than October 1, 2011, sub- 
ject to subparagraph (B), the Inspector General shall sub- 
mit to Congress a report containing the results of the 
study conducted under paragraph (1), together with rec- 
ommendations for such legislation and administrative ac- 
tion as the Inspector General determines appropriate. 

(B) Limitation on information contained in re- 
port. — The report submitted under subparagraph (A) shall 
not include any information that the Inspector General de- 
termines is proprietary or is likely to negatively impact the 
ability of a PDP sponsor or a State plan under title XIX 
to negotiate prices for covered part D drugs or covered out- 
patient drugs, respectively. 

(3) Definitions. — In this section: 

(A) Covered part d drug. — The term "covered part D 
drug" has the meaning given such term in section 1860D- 
2(e) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-102(e)). 

(B) Covered outpatient drug. — The term "covered 
outpatient drug" has the meaning given such term in sec- 
tion 1927(k) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r(k)). 

(C) MA-PD plan.— The term "MA-PD plan" has the 
meaning given such term in section 1860D-41(a)(9) of such 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-151(a)(9)). 

(D) Medicare advantage organization. — The term 
"Medicare Advantage organization" has the meaning given 
such term in section 1859(a)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395w-28)(a)(l)). 

(E) PDP sponsor.— The term "PDP sponsor" has the 
meaning given such term in section 1860D-41(a)(13) of 
such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-151(a)(13)). 

(F) Prescription drug plan. — The term "prescription 
drug plan" has the meaning given such term in section 
1860D-41(a)(14) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-151(a)(14)). 

SEC. 3314. INCLUDING COSTS INCURRED BY AIDS DRUG ASSISTANCE 
PROGRAMS AND INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE IN PROVIDING 
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS toward the annual out-of- 
pocket threshold under part d. 

(a) In General.— Section 1860D-2(b)(4)(C) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-102(b)(4)(C)) is amended— 

(1) in clause (i), by striking "and" at the end; 

(2) in clause (ii) — 

(A) by striking "such costs shall be treated as incurred 
only if and inserting "subject to clause (iii), such costs 
shall be treated as incurred only if; 

June 9, 2010 



397 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3315 



(B) by striking ", under section 1860D-14, or under a 
State Pharmaceutical Assistance Program"; and 

(C) by striking the period at the end and inserting "; 
and"; and 

(3) by inserting after clause (ii) the following new clause: 
"(hi) such costs shall be treated as incurred and 
shall not be considered to be reimbursed under clause 
(ii) if such costs are borne or paid — 
"(I) under section 1860D-14; 
"(II) under a State Pharmaceutical Assistance 
Program; 

"(III) by the Indian Health Service, an Indian 
tribe or tribal organization, or an urban Indian or- 
ganization (as defined in section 4 of the Indian 
Health Care Improvement Act); or 

"(IV) under an AIDS Drug Assistance Pro- 
gram under part B of title XXVI of the Public 
Health Service Act.", 
(b) Effective Date. — The amendments made by subsection (a) 
shall apply to costs incurred on or after January 1, 2011. 

SEC. 3315. [IMMEDIATE REDUCTION IN COVERAGE GAP IN 
2010] [REPEALED AND REPLACED]. 

[This section (and the amendments made by this section) re- 
pealed by section 1101(a)(2) of HCERA. Section 1101(a)(1) of 
HCERA provided for the following immediate reduction in the cov- 
erage gap in 2010:1 

(a) [Sec. 1101(a)(1) of HCERA:] Coverage Gap Rebate for 
2010.— 

(1) In general. — Section 1860D-42 of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-152) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new subsection: 
"(c) Coverage Gap Rebate for 2010. — 

"(1) In general. — In the case of an individual described in 
subparagraphs (A) through (D) of section 1860D-14A(g)(l) who 
as of the last day of a calendar quarter in 2010 has incurred 
costs for covered part D drugs so that the individual has ex- 
ceeded the initial coverage limit under section 1860D-2(b)(3) 
for 2010, the Secretary shall provide for payment from the 
Medicare Prescription Drug Account of $250 to the individual 
by not later than the 15th day of the third month following the 
end of such quarter. 

"(2) Limitation. — The Secretary shall provide only 1 pay- 
ment under this subsection with respect to any individual.". 



Sec. 3401 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



398 



Subtitle E — Ensuring Medicare 
Sustainability 

SEC. 3401. REVISION OF CERTAIN MARKET BASKET UPDATES AND IN- 
CORPORATION OF PRODUCTD7ITY IMPROVEMENTS INTO 
MARKET BASKET UPDATES THAT DO NOT ALREADY IN- 
CORPORATE SUCH IMPROVEMENTS. 

(a) Inpatient Acute Hospitals. — Section 1886(b)(3)(B) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(b)(3)(B)), as amended by 
section 3001(a)(3), is further amended — 

(1) in clause (i)(XX), by striking "clause (viii)" and insert- 
ing "clauses (viii), (ix), (xi), and (xii)"; 

(2) in the first sentence of clause (viii), by inserting "of 
such applicable percentage increase (determined without re- 
gard to clause (ix), (xi), or (xii))" after "one-quarter"; 

(3) in the first sentence of clause (ix)(I), by inserting "(de- 
termined without regard to clause (viii), (xi), or (xii))" after 
"clause (i)" the second time it appears; and 

(4) by adding at the end the following new clauses: 
"(xi)(I) For 2012 and each subsequent fiscal year, after deter- 
mining the applicable percentage increase described in clause (i) 
and after application of clauses (viii) and (ix), such percentage in- 
crease shall be reduced by the productivity adjustment described in 
subclause (II). 

"(II) The productivity adjustment described in this subclause, 
with respect to a percentage, factor, or update for a fiscal year, 
year, cost reporting period, or other annual period, is a productivity 
adjustment equal to the 10-year moving average of changes in an- 
nual economy-wide private nonfarm business multi-factor produc- 
tivity (as projected by the Secretary for the 10-year period ending 
with the applicable fiscal year, year, cost reporting period, or other 
annual period). 

"(Ill) The application of subclause (I) may result in the applica- 
ble percentage increase described in clause (i) being less than 0.0 
for a fiscal year, and may result in payment rates under this sec- 
tion for a fiscal year being less than such payment rates for the 
preceding fiscal year. 

"(xii) After determining the applicable percentage increase de- 
scribed in clause (i), and after application of clauses (viii), (ix), and 
(xi), the Secretary shall reduce such applicable percentage in- 
crease — [As revised by section 10319(a)~\ 

"(I) for each of fiscal years 2010 and 2011, by 0.25 percent- 
age point; 

"(II) for each of fiscal years 2012 and 2013, by 0.1 percent- 
age point; 

"(III) for fiscal year 2014, by 0.3 percentage point; 
"(IV) for each of fiscal years 2015 and 2016, by 0.2 percent- 
age point; and 

"(V) for each of fiscal years 2017, 2018, and 2019, by 0.75 
percentage point. 
The application of this clause may result in the applicable percent- 
age increase described in clause (i) being less than 0.0 for a fiscal 
year, and may result in payment rates under this section for a fis- 

June 9, 2010 



399 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3401 



cal year being less than such payment rates for the preceding fiscal 
year. [As revised by section 1105(a)(2) of HCERAY- 

(b) Skilled Nursing Facilities— Section 1888(e)(5)(B) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395yy(e)(5)(B)) is amended— 

(1) by striking "PERCENTAGE. — The term" and inserting 
"percentage. — 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), the term"; 

and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new clause: 

"(ii) Adjustment. — For fiscal year 2012 and each 
subsequent fiscal year, after determining the percent- 
age described in clause (i), the Secretary shall reduce 
such percentage by the productivity adjustment de- 
scribed in section 1886(b)(3)(B)(xi)(II). The application 
of the preceding sentence may result in such percent- 
age being less than 0.0 for a fiscal year, and may re- 
sult in payment rates under this subsection for a fiscal 
year being less than such payment rates for the pre- 
ceding fiscal year.". 

(c) Long-term Care Hospitals. — Section 1886(m) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(m)) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new paragraphs: 

"(3) Implementation for rate year 2010 and subsequent 
years. — 

"(A) In general. — In implementing the system de- 
scribed in paragraph (1) for rate year 2010 and each subse- 
quent rate year, any annual update to a standard Federal 
rate for discharges for the hospital during the rate year, 
shall be reduced — 

"(i) for rate year 2012 and each subsequent rate 

year, by the productivity adjustment described in sec- 
tion 1886(b)(3)(B)(xi)(II); and 

"(ii) for each of rate years 2010 through 2019, by 

the other adjustment described in paragraph (4). 

"(B) Special rule. — The application of this paragraph 
may result in such annual update being less than 0.0 for 
a rate year, and may result in payment rates under the 
system described in paragraph (1) for a rate year being 
less than such payment rates for the preceding rate year. 
"(4) Other adjustment. — [As revised by section 10319(b) 
and section 1105(b) of HCERA] For purposes of paragraph 
(3)(A)(ii), the other adjustment described in this paragraph is — 

"(A) for rate year 2010, 0.25 percentage point; 

"(B) for rate year 2011, 0.50 percentage point; 

"(C) for each of the rate years beginning in 2012 and 
2013, 0.1 percentage point; 

"(D) for rate year 2014, 0.3 percentage point; 

"(E) for each of rate years 2015 and 2016, 0.2 percent- 
age point; and 

"(F) for each of rate years 2017, 2018, and 2019, 0.75 
percentage point.". 

(d) Inpatient Rehabilitation Facilities. — Section 1886(j)(3) 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(j)(3)) is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (C) — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3401 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



400 



(A) by striking "FACTOR. — For purposes" and inserting 
"factor. — 

"(i) In general. — For purposes"; 

(B) by inserting "subject to clause (ii)" before the pe- 
riod at the end of the first sentence of clause (i), as added 
by paragraph (1); and 

(C) by adding at the end the following new clause: 
"(ii) Productivity and other adjustment. — 

After establishing the increase factor described in 
clause (i) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall reduce 
such increase factor — 

"(I) for fiscal year 2012 and each subsequent 
fiscal year, by the productivity adjustment de- 
scribed in section 1886(b)(3)(B)(xi)(II); and 

"(II) for each of fiscal years 2010 through 
2019, by the other adjustment described in sub- 
paragraph (D). 
The application of this clause may result in the in- 
crease factor under this subparagraph being less than 
0.0 for a fiscal year, and may result in payment rates 
under this subsection for a fiscal year being less than 
such payment rates for the preceding fiscal year."; and 
(2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: 
"(D) Other adjustment. — [As revised by section 
10319(b) and section 1105(b) of HCERA] For purposes of 
subparagraph (C)(ii)(II), the other adjustment described in 
this subparagraph is — 

"(i) for each of fiscal years 2010 and 2011, 0.25 
percentage point; 

"(ii) for each of fiscal years 2012 and 2013, 0.1 
percentage point; 

"(hi) for fiscal year 2014, 0.3 percentage point; 
"(iv) for each of fiscal years 2015 and 2016, 0.2 
percentage point; and 

"(v) for each of fiscal years 2017, 2018, and 2019, 
0.75 percentage point.", 
(e) Home Health Agencies. — Section 1895(b)(3)(B) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395fff(b)(3)(B)) is amended— 

(1) in clause (ii)(V), by striking "clause (v)" and inserting 
"clauses (v) and (vi)"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new clause: 

"(vi) Adjustments. — After determining the home 
health market basket percentage increase under 
clause (hi), and after application of clause (v), the Sec- 
retary shall reduce such percentage — 

"(I) for 2015 and each subsequent year, by the 

productivity adjustment described in section 

1886(b)(3)(B)(xi)(II); and 

"(II) for each of 2011, 2012, and 2013, by 1 

percentage point. [As revised by section 10319(d)] 
The application of this clause may result in the home 
health market basket percentage increase under 
clause (hi) being less than 0.0 for a year, and may re- 
sult in payment rates under the system under this 

June 9, 2010 



401 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3401 



subsection for a year being less than such payment 
rates for the preceding year.", 
(f) Psychiatric Hospitals— Section 1886 of the Social Secu- 
rity Act, as amended by sections 3001, 3008, 3025, and 3133, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: 
"(s) Prospective Payment for Psychiatric Hospitals. — 

"(1) Reference to establishment and implementation 
of system. — For provisions related to the establishment and 
implementation of a prospective payment system for payments 
under this title for inpatient hospital services furnished by psy- 
chiatric hospitals (as described in clause (i) of subsection 
(d)(1)(B)) and psychiatric units (as described in the matter fol- 
lowing clause (v) of such subsection), see section 124 of the 
Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Balanced Budget Refinement 
Act of 1999. 

"(2) Implementation for rate year beginning in 2010 
and subsequent rate years. — 

"(A) In GENERAL. — In implementing the system de- 
scribed in paragraph (1) for the rate year beginning in 
2010 and any subsequent rate year, any update to a base 
rate for days during the rate year for a psychiatric hospital 
or unit, respectively, shall be reduced — 

"(i) for the rate year beginning in 2012 and each 
subsequent rate year, by the productivity adjustment 
described in section 1886(b)(3)(B)(xi)(II); and 

"(h) for each of the rate years beginning in 2010 
through 2019, by the other adjustment described in 
paragraph (3). 

"(B) Special rule. — The application of this paragraph 
may result in such update being less than 0.0 for a rate 
year, and may result in payment rates under the system 
described in paragraph (1) for a rate year being less than 
such payment rates for the preceding rate year. 
"(3) Other adjustment. — [As revised by section 10319(e) 
and section 1105(d) of HCERA] For purposes of paragraph 
(2)(A)(ii), the other adjustment described in this paragraph is — 

"(A) for each of the rate years beginning in 2010 and 
2011, 0.25 percentage point; 

"(B) for each of the rate years beginning in 2012 and 
2013, 0.1 percentage point; 

"(C) for the rate year beginning in 2014, 0.3 percent- 
age point; 

"(D) for each of the rate years beginning in 2015 and 
2016, 0.2 percentage point; and 

"(E) for each of the rate years beginning in 2017, 2018, 
and 2019, 0.75 percentage point. 

"(4) Quality reporting. — [As added by section 10322(a)] 
"(A) Reduction in update for failure to report. — 
"(i) In general. — Under the system described in 
paragraph (1), for rate year 2014 and each subsequent 
rate year, in the case of a psychiatric hospital or psy- 
chiatric unit that does not submit data to the Sec- 
retary in accordance with subparagraph (C) with re- 
spect to such a rate year, any annual update to a 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3401 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



402 



standard Federal rate for discharges for the hospital 
during the rate year, and after application of para- 
graph (2), shall be reduced by 2 percentage points. 

"(ii) Special rule. — The application of this sub- 
paragraph may result in such annual update being 
less than 0.0 for a rate year, and may result in pay- 
ment rates under the system described in paragraph 
(1) for a rate year being less than such payment rates 
for the preceding rate year. 

"(B) Noncumulative application. — Any reduction 
under subparagraph (A) shall apply only with respect to 
the rate year involved and the Secretary shall not take 
into account such reduction in computing the payment 
amount under the system described in paragraph (1) for a 
subsequent rate year. 

"(C) Submission of quality data. — For rate year 
2014 and each subsequent rate year, each psychiatric hos- 
pital and psychiatric unit shall submit to the Secretary 
data on quality measures specified under subparagraph 
(D). Such data shall be submitted in a form and manner, 
and at a time, specified by the Secretary for purposes of 
this subparagraph. 

"(D) Quality measures. — 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), any meas- 
ure specified by the Secretary under this subpara- 
graph must have been endorsed by the entity with a 
contract under section 1890(a). 

"(ii) Exception. — In the case of a specified area or 
medical topic determined appropriate by the Secretary 
for which a feasible and practical measure has not 
been endorsed by the entity with a contract under sec- 
tion 1890(a), the Secretary may specify a measure that 
is not so endorsed as long as due consideration is 
given to measures that have been endorsed or adopted 
by a consensus organization identified by the Sec- 
retary. 

"(hi) Time frame. — Not later than October 1, 
2012, the Secretary shall publish the measures se- 
lected under this subparagraph that will be applicable 
with respect to rate year 2014. 

"(E) Public availability of data submitted. — The 
Secretary shall establish procedures for making data sub- 
mitted under subparagraph (C) available to the public. 
Such procedures shall ensure that a psychiatric hospital 
and a psychiatric unit has the opportunity to review the 
data that is to be made public with respect to the hospital 
or unit prior to such data being made public. The Sec- 
retary shall report quality measures that relate to services 
furnished in inpatient settings in psychiatric hospitals and 
psychiatric units on the Internet website of the Centers for 
Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services.", 
(g) Hospice Care. — Section 1814(i)(l)(C) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f(i)(l)(C)), as amended by section 3132, is 

June 9, 2010 



403 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3401 



amended by adding at the end the following new clauses: [As re- 
vised by section 10319(f)~\ 

"(iv) After determining the market basket percentage increase 
under clause (ii)(VTI) or (hi), as applicable, with respect to fiscal 
year 2013 and each subsequent fiscal year, the Secretary shall re- 
duce such percentage — 

"(I) for 2013 and each subsequent fiscal year, by the pro- 
ductivity adjustment described in section 1886(b)(3)(B)(xi)(II); 
and 

"(II) subject to clause (v), for each of fiscal years 2013 
through 2019, by 0.3 percentage point. 
The application of this clause may result in the market basket per- 
centage increase under clause (ii)(VII) or (hi), as applicable, being 
less than 0.0 for a fiscal year, and may result in payment rates 
under this subsection for a fiscal year being less than such pay- 
ment rates for the preceding fiscal year. 

"(v) Clause (iv)(II) shall be applied with respect to any of fiscal 
years 2014 through 2019 by substituting '0.0 percentage points' for 
'0.3 percentage point', if for such fiscal year — 
"(I) the excess (if any) of — 

"(aa) the total percentage of the non-elderly insured 
population for the preceding fiscal year (based on the most 
recent estimates available from the Director of the Con- 
gressional Budget Office before a vote in either House on 
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act that, if de- 
termined in the affirmative, would clear such Act for en- 
rollment); over 

"(bb) the total percentage of the non-elderly insured 
population for such preceding fiscal year (as estimated by 
the Secretary); exceeds 
"(II) 5 percentage points.", 
(h) Dialysis.— Section 1881(b)(14)(F) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395rr(b)(14)(F)) is amended— 

(1) in clause (i) — 

(A) by inserting "(I)" after "(F)(i)" 

(B) in subclause (I), as inserted by subparagraph (A) — 

(i) by striking "clause (ii)" and inserting "sub- 
clause (II) and clause (ii)"; and 

(ii) by striking "minus 1.0 percentage point"; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following new subclause: 
"(II) For 2012 and each subsequent year, after determining the 

increase factor described in subclause (I), the Secretary shall re- 
duce such increase factor by the productivity adjustment described 
in section 1886(b)(3)(B)(xi)(II). The application of the preceding sen- 
tence may result in such increase factor being less than 0.0 for a 
year, and may result in payment rates under the payment system 
under this paragraph for a year being less than such payment 
rates for the preceding year."; and 

(2) in clause (ii)QI)— 

(A) by striking "The" and inserting "Subject to clause 
(i)(II), the"; and 

(B) by striking "clause (i) minus 1.0 percentage point" 
and inserting "clause (i)(I)". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3401 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



404 



(i) Outpatient Hospitals. — Section 1833(t)(3) of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 13951(t)(3)) is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (C)(iv), by inserting "and subpara- 
graph (F) of this paragraph" after "(17)"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs: 

"(F) Productivity and other adjustment. — After de- 
termining the OPD fee schedule increase factor under sub- 
paragraph (C)(iv), the Secretary shall reduce such increase 
factor — 

"(i) for 2012 and subsequent years, by the produc- 
tivity adjustment described in section 
1886(b)(3)(B)(xi)(II); and 

"(ii) for each of 2010 through 2019, by the adjust- 
ment described in subparagraph (G). 
The application of this subparagraph may result in the in- 
crease factor under subparagraph (C)(iv) being less than 
0.0 for a year, and may result in payment rates under the 
payment system under this subsection for a year being less 
than such payment rates for the preceding year. 

"(G) Other adjustment. — [As revised by section 
10319(g) and section 1105(e) of HCERA] For purposes of 
subparagraph (F)(ii), the adjustment described in this sub- 
paragraph is — 

"(i) for each of 2010 and 2011, 0.25 percentage 
point; 

"(ii) for each of 2012 and 2013, 0.1 percentage 
point; 

"(hi) for 2014, 0.3 percentage point; 
"(iv) for each of 2015 and 2016, 0.2 percentage 
point; and 

"(v) for each of 2017, 2018, and 2019, 0.75 percent- 
age point.". 

(j) Ambulance Services— Section 1834(1X3) of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(l)(3)) is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (A), by striking "and" at the end; 

(2) in subparagraph (B) — 

(A) by inserting ", subject to subparagraph (C) and the 
succeeding sentence of this paragraph," after "increased"; 
and 

(B) by striking the period at the end and inserting "; 
and"; 

(3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: 

"(C) for 2011 and each subsequent year, after deter- 
mining the percentage increase under subparagraph (B) 
for the year, reduce such percentage increase by the pro- 
ductivity adjustment described in section 
1886(b)(3)(B)(xi)(II)."; and 

(4) by adding at the end the following flush sentence: 
"The application of subparagraph (C) may result in the per- 
centage increase under subparagraph (B) being less than 0.0 
for a year, and may result in payment rates under the fee 
schedule under this subsection for a year being less than such 
payment rates for the preceding year.". 

June 9, 2010 



405 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3401 



(k) Ambulatory Surgical Center Services. — Section 
1833GX2XD) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 13951(i)(2)(D)) is 
amended — 

(1) by redesignating clause (v) as clause (vi); and 

(2) by inserting after clause (iv) the following new clause: 

"(v) In implementing the system described in 
clause (i) for 2011 and each subsequent year, any an- 
nual update under such system for the year, after ap- 
plication of clause (iv), shall be reduced by the produc- 
tivity adjustment described in section 
1886(b)(3)(B)(xi)(II). The application of the preceding 
sentence may result in such update being less than 0.0 
for a year, and may result in payment rates under the 
system described in clause (i) for a year being less 
than such payment rates for the preceding year.". 
(1) Laboratory Services. — Section 1833(h)(2)(A) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 13951(h)(2)(A)) is amended— 

(1) in clause (i) — 

(A) by inserting ", subject to clause (iv)," after "year) 
by"; and 

(B) by striking "through 2013" and inserting "and 
2010"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new clause: 

"(iv) After determining the adjustment to the fee 
schedules under clause (i), the Secretary shall reduce 
such adjustment — 

"(I) for 2011 and each subsequent year, by the 
productivity adjustment described in section 
1886(bX3XB)(xi)(II); and 

"(II) for each of 2011 through 2015, by 1.75 
percentage points. 
Subclause (I) shall not apply in a year where the ad- 
justment to the fee schedules determined under clause 
(i) is 0.0 or a percentage decrease for a year. The ap- 
plication of the productivity adjustment under sub- 
clause (I) shall not result in an adjustment to the fee 
schedules under clause (i) being less than 0.0 for a 
year. The application of subclause (II) may result in 
an adjustment to the fee schedules under clause (i) 
being less than 0.0 for a year, and may result in pay- 
ment rates for a year being less than such payment 
rates for the preceding year.", 
(m) Certain Durable Medical Equipment. — Section 
1834(aX14) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(14)) is 
amended — 

(1) in subparagraph (K) — 

(A) by striking "2011, 2012, and 2013,"; and 

(B) by inserting "and" after the semicolon at the end; 

(2) by striking subparagraphs (L) and (M) and inserting 
the following new subparagraph: 

"(L) for 2011 and each subsequent year — 

"(i) the percentage increase in the consumer price 
index for all urban consumers (United States city av- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3401 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



406 



erage) for the 12-month period ending with June of 
the previous year, reduced by — 

"(ii) the productivity adjustment described in sec- 
tion 1886(b)(3)(B)(xi)(II)."; and 
(3) by adding at the end the following flush sentence: 
"The application of subparagraph (L)(ii) may result in the cov- 
ered item update under this paragraph being less than 0.0 for 
a year, and may result in payment rates under this subsection 
for a year being less than such payment rates for the preceding 
year.". 

(n) Prosthetic Devices, Orthotics, and Prosthetics. — Sec- 
tion 1834(h)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(h)(4)) 
is amended — 

(1) in subparagraph (A) — 

(A) in clause (ix), by striking "and" at the end; 

(B) in clause (x) — 

(i) by striking "a subsequent year" and inserting 
"for each of 2007 through 2010"; and 

(ii) by inserting "and" after the semicolon at the 

end; 

(C) by adding at the end the following new clause: 
"(xi) for 2011 and each subsequent year — 

"(I) the percentage increase in the consumer 
price index for all urban consumers (United States 
city average) for the 12-month period ending with 
June of the previous year, reduced by — 

"(II) the productivity adjustment described in 
section 1886(b)(3)(B)(xi)(II)."; and 

(D) by adding at the end the following flush sentence: 
"The application of subparagraph (A)(xi)(II) may result in the 
applicable percentage increase under subparagraph (A) being 
less than 0.0 for a year, and may result in payment rates 
under this subsection for a year being less than such payment 
rates for the preceding year.". 

(o) Other Items. — Section 1842(s)(l) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395u(sXD) is amended— 

(1) in the first sentence, by striking "Subject to" and in- 
serting "(A) Subject to"; 

(2) by striking the second sentence and inserting the fol- 
lowing new subparagraph: 

"(B) Any fee schedule established under this para- 
graph for such item or service shall be updated — 
"(i) for years before 2011 — 

"(I) subject to subclause (II), by the percent- 
age increase in the consumer price index for all 
urban consumers (United States city average) for 
the 12-month period ending with June of the pre- 
ceding year; and 

"(II) for items and services described in para- 
graph (2)(D) for 2009, section 1834(a)(14)(J) shall 
apply under this paragraph instead of the percent- 
age increase otherwise applicable; and 
"(ii) for 2011 and subsequent years — 

June 9, 2010 



407 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3403M899A SSA 



"(I) the percentage increase in the consumer 
price index for all urban consumers (United States 
city average) for the 12-month period ending with 
June of the previous year, reduced by — 

"(II) the productivity adjustment described in 
section 1886(b)(3)(B)(xi)(II)."; and 
(3) by adding at the end the following flush sentence: 
"The application of subparagraph (B)(ii)(II) may result in the 
update under this paragraph being less than 0.0 for a year, 
and may result in payment rates under any fee schedule estab- 
lished under this paragraph for a year being less than such 
payment rates for the preceding year.". 

(p) No Application Prior to April 1, 2010. — Notwithstanding 
the preceding provisions of this section, the amendments made by 
subsections (a), (c), and (d) shall not apply to discharges occurring 
before April 1, 2010. 

SEC. 3402. TEMPORARY ADJUSTMENT TO THE CALCULATION OF PART 
B PREMIUMS. 

Section 1839(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395r(i)) 
is amended — 

(1) in paragraph (2), in the matter preceding subparagraph 
(A), by inserting "subject to paragraph (6)," after "subsection,"; 

(2) in paragraph (3)(A)(i), by striking "The applicable" and 
inserting "Subject to paragraph (6), the applicable"; 

(3) by redesignating paragraph (6) as paragraph (7); and 

(4) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following new 
paragraph: 

"(6) Temporary adjustment to income thresholds. — 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, during 
the period beginning on January 1, 2011, and ending on De- 
cember 31, 2019— 

"(A) the threshold amount otherwise applicable under 
paragraph (2) shall be equal to such amount for 2010; and 
"(B) the dollar amounts otherwise applicable under 
paragraph (3)(C)(i) shall be equal to such dollar amounts 
for 2010.". 

SEC. 3403. INDEPENDENT [MEDICARE] [PAYMENT] ADVISORY BOARD. 

[Section 10320(b) provides the following name change: "Any 
reference in the provisions of or amendments made by, section 3403 
to the 'Independent Medicare Advisory Board' shall be deemed to be 
a reference to the 'Independent Payment Advisory Board"'~\ 

(a) Board. — 

(1) In general.— Title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395 et seq.), as amended by section 3022, is amended 
by adding at the end the following new section: [As revised by 
section 10320(a)1 

"INDEPENDENT MEDICARE ADVISORY BOARD 

"Sec 1899A [42 U.S.C. 1395kkk]. (a) Establishment.— There 
is established an independent board to be known as the 'Inde- 
pendent Medicare Advisory Board' [Note: Referred to as the "Inde- 
pendent Payment Advisory Board"] . 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



408 



"(b) Purpose. — It is the purpose of this section to, in accord- 
ance with the following provisions of this section, reduce the per 
capita rate of growth in Medicare spending — 

"(1) by requiring the Chief Actuary of the Centers for 
Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services to determine in each year to 
which this section applies (in this section referred to as 'a de- 
termination year') the projected per capita growth rate under 
Medicare for the second year following the determination year 
(in this section referred to as 'an implementation year'); 

"(2) if the projection for the implementation year exceeds 
the target growth rate for that year, by requiring the Board to 
develop and submit during the first year following the deter- 
mination year (in this section referred to as 'a proposal year') 
a proposal containing recommendations to reduce the Medicare 
per capita growth rate to the extent required by this section; 
and 

"(3) by requiring the Secretary to implement such pro- 
posals unless Congress enacts legislation pursuant to this sec- 
tion. 

"(c) Board Proposals. — 
"(1) Development. — 

"(A) In general. — The Board shall develop detailed 
and specific proposals related to the Medicare program in 
accordance with the succeeding provisions of this section. 

"(B) Advisory reports. — Beginning January 15, 2014, 
the Board may develop and submit to Congress advisory 
reports on matters related to the Medicare program, re- 
gardless of whether or not the Board submitted a proposal 
for such year. Such a report may, for years prior to 2020, 
include recommendations regarding improvements to pay- 
ment systems for providers of services and suppliers who 
are not otherwise subject to the scope of the Board's rec- 
ommendations in a proposal under this section. Any advi- 
sory report submitted under this subparagraph shall not 
be subject to the rules for congressional consideration 
under subsection (d). In any year (beginning with 2014) 
that the Board is not required to submit a proposal under 
this section, the Board shall submit to Congress an advi- 
sory report on matters related to the Medicare program. 
[As revised by section 10320(a)(l)(A)~\ 
"(2) Proposals — 

"(A) Requirements. — Each proposal submitted under 
this section in a proposal year shall meet each of the fol- 
lowing requirements: 

"(i) If the Chief Actuary of the Centers for Medi- 
care &amp; Medicaid Services has made a determination 
under paragraph (7)(A) in the determination year, the 
proposal shall include recommendations so that the 
proposal as a whole (after taking into account rec- 
ommendations under clause (v)) will result in a net re- 
duction in total Medicare program spending in the im- 
plementation year that is at least equal to the applica- 
ble savings target established under paragraph (7)(B) 
for such implementation year. In determining whether 

June 9, 2010 



409 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



a proposal meets the requirement of the preceding 
sentence, reductions in Medicare program spending 
during the 3-month period immediately preceding the 
implementation year shall be counted to the extent 
that such reductions are a result of the implementa- 
tion of recommendations contained in the proposal for 
a change in the payment rate for an item or service 
that was effective during such period pursuant to sub- 
section (e)(2)(A). 

"(ii) The proposal shall not include any rec- 
ommendation to ration health care, raise revenues or 
Medicare beneficiary premiums under section 1818, 
1818A, or 1839, increase Medicare beneficiary cost- 
sharing (including deductibles, coinsurance, and co- 
payments), or otherwise restrict benefits or modify eli- 
gibility criteria. 

"(hi) In the case of proposals submitted prior to 
December 31, 2018, the proposal shall not include any 
recommendation that would reduce payment rates for 
items and services furnished, prior to December 31, 
2019, by providers of services (as defined in section 
186 l(u)) and suppliers (as defined in section 1861(d)) 
scheduled, pursuant to the amendments made by sec- 
tion 3401 of the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act, to receive a reduction to the inflationary 
payment updates of such providers of services and 
suppliers in excess of a reduction due to productivity 
in a year in which such recommendations would take 
effect. 

"(iv) As appropriate, the proposal shall include 
recommendations to reduce Medicare payments under 
parts C and D, such as reductions in direct subsidy 
payments to Medicare Advantage and prescription 
drug plans specified under paragraph (1) and (2) of 
section 1860D-15(a) that are related to administrative 
expenses (including profits) for basic coverage, denying 
high bids or removing high bids for prescription drug 
coverage from the calculation of the national average 
monthly bid amount under section 1860D-13(a)(4), 
and reductions in payments to Medicare Advantage 
plans under clauses (i) and (ii) of section 1853(a)(1)(B) 
that are related to administrative expenses (including 
profits) and performance bonuses for Medicare Advan- 
tage plans under section 1853(n). Any such rec- 
ommendation shall not affect the base beneficiary pre- 
mium percentage specified under 1860D-13(a) or the 
full premium subsidy under section 1860D-14(a). [As 
revised by section 10320(a)(l)(Bj\ 

"(v) The proposal shall include recommendations 
with respect to administrative funding for the Sec- 
retary to carry out the recommendations contained in 
the proposal. 

"(vi) The proposal shall only include recommenda- 
tions related to the Medicare program. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



410 



"(vii) If the Chief Actuary of the Centers for Medi- 
care &amp; Medicaid Services has made a determination 
described in subsection (e)(3)(B)(i)(II) in the deter- 
mination year, the proposal shall be designed to help 
reduce the growth rate described in paragraph (8) 
while maintaining or enhancing beneficiary access to 
quality care under this title. [As added by section 
10320(a)(l)(B)(ii)] 

"(B) Additional considerations. — In developing and 
submitting each proposal under this section in a proposal 
year, the Board shall, to the extent feasible — 

"(i) give priority to recommendations that extend 
Medicare solvency; 

"(ii) include recommendations that — 

"(I) improve the health care delivery system 
and health outcomes, including by promoting inte- 
grated care, care coordination, prevention and 
wellness, and quality and efficiency improvement; 
and 

"(II) protect and improve Medicare bene- 
ficiaries' access to necessary and evidence-based 
items and services, including in rural and frontier 
areas; 

"(hi) include recommendations that target reduc- 
tions in Medicare program spending to sources of ex- 
cess cost growth; 

"(iv) consider the effects on Medicare beneficiaries 
of changes in payments to providers of services (as de- 
fined in section 1861(u)) and suppliers (as defined in 
section 1861(d)); 

"(v) consider the effects of the recommendations 
on providers of services and suppliers with actual or 
projected negative cost margins or payment updates; 

"(vi) consider the unique needs of Medicare bene- 
ficiaries who are dually eligible for Medicare and the 
Medicaid program under title XIX; and 

"(vii) take into account the data and findings con- 
tained in the annual reports under subsection (n) in 
order to develop proposals that can most effectively 
promote the delivery of efficient, high quality care to 
Medicare beneficiaries. [As added by section 
10320(a)(l)(m 

"(C) No INCREASE in total medicare program spend- 
ing. — Each proposal submitted under this section shall be 
designed in such a manner that implementation of the rec- 
ommendations contained in the proposal would not be ex- 
pected to result, over the 10-year period starting with the 
implementation year, in any increase in the total amount 
of net Medicare program spending relative to the total 
amount of net Medicare program spending that would 
have occurred absent such implementation. 

"(D) Consultation with medpac. — The Board shall 
submit a draft copy of each proposal to be submitted under 
this section to the Medicare Payment Advisory Commis- 

June 9, 2010 



411 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3403M899A SSA 



sion established under section 1805 for its review. The 
Board shall submit such draft copy by not later than Sep- 
tember 1 of the determination year. 

"(E) Review and comment by the secretary. — The 
Board shall submit a draft copy of each proposal to be sub- 
mitted to Congress under this section to the Secretary for 
the Secretary's review and comment. The Board shall sub- 
mit such draft copy by not later than September 1 of the 
determination year. Not later than March 1 of the submis- 
sion year, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress 
on the results of such review, unless the Secretary submits 
a proposal under paragraph (5)(A) in that year. 

"(F) Consultations. — In carrying out its duties under 
this section, the Board shall engage in regular consulta- 
tions with the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access 
Commission under section 1900. 

"(3) Submission of board proposal to congress and 
THE PRESIDENT. — [As revised by section 10320(a)(l)(D)~\ 
"(A) In general. — 

"(i) In general. — Except as provided in clause (ii) 
and subsection (f)(3)(B), the Board shall submit a pro- 
posal under this section to Congress and the President 
on January 15 of each year (beginning with 2014). 

"(ii) Exception. — The Board shall not submit a 
proposal under clause (i) in a proposal year if the year 
is — 

"(I) a year for which the Chief Actuary of the 
Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services makes 
a determination in the determination year under 
paragraph (6)(A) that the growth rate described in 
clause (i) of such paragraph does not exceed the 
growth rate described in clause (ii) of such para- 
graph; or 

"(II) a year in which the Chief Actuary of the 
Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services makes 
a determination in the determination year that 
the projected percentage increase (if any) for the 
medical care expenditure category of the Con- 
sumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers 
(United States city average) for the implementa- 
tion year is less than the projected percentage in- 
crease (if any) in the Consumer Price Index for All 
Urban Consumers (all items; United States city 
average) for such implementation year, 
"(hi) Start-up period. — The Board may not sub- 
mit a proposal under clause (i) prior to January 15, 
2014. 

"(B) Required information. — Each proposal sub- 
mitted by the Board under subparagraph (A)(i) shall in- 
clude — 

"(i) the recommendations described in paragraph 
(2XAXi); 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



412 



"(ii) an explanation of each recommendation con- 
tained in the proposal and the reasons for including 
such recommendation; 

"(hi) an actuarial opinion by the Chief Actuary of 
the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services certi- 
fying that the proposal meets the requirements of sub- 
paragraphs (A)(i) and (C) of paragraph (2); 

"(iv) a legislative proposal that implements the 
recommendations; and 

"(v) other information determined appropriate by 
the Board. 

"(4) Presidential submission to congress. — Upon re- 
ceiving a proposal from the Secretary under paragraph (5), the 
President shall within 2 days submit such proposal to Con- 
gress. [As revised by section 10320(a)(l)(E)~\ 

"(5) Contingent secretarial development of pro- 
posal. — [As revised by section 10320(a)(l)(F)~\ If, with respect 
to a proposal year, the Board is required, but fails, to submit 
a proposal to Congress and the President by the deadline ap- 
plicable under paragraph (3)(A)(i), the Secretary shall develop 
a detailed and specific proposal that satisfies the requirements 
of subparagraphs (A) and (C) (and, to the extent feasible, sub- 
paragraph (B)) of paragraph (2) and contains the information 
required paragraph (3)(B)). By not later than January 25 of the 
year, the Secretary shall transmit — 

"(A) such proposal to the President; and 

"(B) a copy of such proposal to the Medicare Payment 

Advisory Commission for its review. 

"(6) Per capita growth rate projections by chief actu- 
ary. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to subsection (f)(3)(A), not 
later than April 30, 2013, and annually thereafter, the 
Chief Actuary of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid 
Services shall determine in each such year whether — 

"(i) the projected Medicare per capita growth rate 
for the implementation year (as determined under 
subparagraph (B)); exceeds 

"(ii) the projected Medicare per capita target 
growth rate for the implementation year (as deter- 
mined under subparagraph (Q). 
"(B) Medicare per capita growth rate. — 

"(i) In general. — [As revised by section 
10320(a)(l)(G)~\ For purposes of this section, the Medi- 
care per capita growth rate for an implementation 
year shall be calculated as the projected 5-year aver- 
age (ending with such year) of the growth in Medicare 
program spending (calculated as the sum of per capita 
spending under each of parts A, B, and D). 

"(ii) Requirement. — The projection under clause 
(i) shall— 

"(I) to the extent that there is projected to be 
a negative update to the single conversion factor 
applicable to payments for physicians' services 
under section 1848(d) furnished in the proposal 

June 9, 2010 



413 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



year or the implementation year, assume that 
such update for such services is percent rather 
than the negative percent that would otherwise 
apply; and 

"(II) take into account any delivery system re- 
forms or other payment changes that have been 
enacted or published in final rules but not yet im- 
plemented as of the making of such calculation. 
"(C) Medicare per capita target growth rate. — For 
purposes of this section, the Medicare per capita target 
growth rate for an implementation year shall be calculated 
as the projected 5-year average (ending with such year) 
percentage increase in — 

"(i) with respect to a determination year that is 
prior to 2018, the average of the projected percentage 
increase (if any) in — 

"(I) the Consumer Price Index for All Urban 
Consumers (all items; United States city average); 
and 

"(II) the medical care expenditure category of 
the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Con- 
sumers (United States city average); and 
"(ii) with respect to a determination year that is 
after 2017, the nominal gross domestic product per 
capita plus 1.0 percentage point. 
"(7) Savings requirement. — 

"(A) In general. — If, with respect to a determination 
year, the Chief Actuary of the Centers for Medicare &amp; 
Medicaid Services makes a determination under paragraph 
(6)(A) that the growth rate described in clause (i) of such 
paragraph exceeds the growth rate described in clause (ii) 
of such paragraph, the Chief Actuary shall establish an ap- 
plicable savings target for the implementation year. 

"(B) Applicable savings target. — For purposes of 
this section, the applicable savings target for an implemen- 
tation year shall be an amount equal to the product of — 
"(i) the total amount of projected Medicare pro- 
gram spending for the proposal year; and 

"(ii) the applicable percent for the implementation 
year. 

"(C) Applicable percent. — For purposes of subpara- 
graph (B), the applicable percent for an implementation 
year is the lesser of — 

"(i) in the case of — 

"(I) implementation year 2015, 0.5 percent; 
"(II) implementation year 2016, 1.0 percent; 
"(III) implementation year 2017, 1.25 percent; 

and 

"(IV) implementation year 2018 or any subse- 
quent implementation year, 1.5 percent; and 
"(ii) the projected excess for the implementation 
year (expressed as a percent) determined under sub- 
paragraph (A). 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



414 



"(8) Per capita rate of growth in national health ex- 
penditures. — In each determination year (beginning in 2018), 
the Chief Actuary of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid 
Services shall project the per capita rate of growth in national 
health expenditures for the implementation year. Such rate of 
growth for an implementation year shall be calculated as the 
projected 5-year average (ending with such year) percentage in- 
crease in national health care expenditures. 
"(d) Congressional Consideration. — [As revised by section 
10320(a)(2)} 

"(1) Introduction. — 

"(A) In general. — On the day on which a proposal is 
submitted by the Board or the President to the House of 
Representatives and the Senate under subsection 
(c)(3)(A)(i) or subsection (c)(4), the legislative proposal (de- 
scribed in subsection (c)(3)(B)(iv)) contained in the pro- 
posal shall be introduced (by request) in the Senate by the 
majority leader of the Senate or by Members of the Senate 
designated by the majority leader of the Senate and shall 
be introduced (by request) in the House by the majority 
leader of the House or by Members of the House des- 
ignated by the majority leader of the House. 

"(B) Not in session. — If either House is not in session 
on the day on which such legislative proposal is submitted, 
the legislative proposal shall be introduced in that House, 
as provided in subparagraph (A), on the first day there- 
after on which that House is in session. 

"(C) Any member. — If the legislative proposal is not 
introduced in either House within 5 days on which that 
House is in session after the day on which the legislative 
proposal is submitted, then any Member of that House 
may introduce the legislative proposal. 

"(D) Referral. — The legislation introduced under this 
paragraph shall be referred by the Presiding Officers of 
the respective Houses to the Committee on Finance in the 
Senate and to the Committee on Energy and Commerce 
and the Committee on Ways and Means in the House of 
Representatives. 

"(2) Committee consideration of proposal. — 

"(A) Reporting bill. — Not later than April 1 of any 
proposal year in which a proposal is submitted by the 
Board or the President to Congress under this section, the 
Committee on Ways and Means and the Committee on En- 
ergy and Commerce of the House of Representatives and 
the Committee on Finance of the Senate may report the 
bill referred to the Committee under paragraph (1)(D) with 
committee amendments related to the Medicare program. 

"(B) Calculations. — In determining whether a com- 
mittee amendment meets the requirement of subparagraph 
(A), the reductions in Medicare program spending during 
the 3-month period immediately preceding the implemen- 
tation year shall be counted to the extent that such reduc- 
tions are a result of the implementation provisions in the 
committee amendment for a change in the payment rate 

June 9, 2010 



415 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



for an item or service that was effective during such period 
pursuant to such amendment. 

"(C) Committee jurisdiction. — Notwithstanding rule 
XV of the Standing Rules of the Senate, a committee 
amendment described in subparagraph (A) may include 
matter not within the jurisdiction of the Committee on Fi- 
nance if that matter is relevant to a proposal contained in 
the bill submitted under subsection (c)(3). 

"(D) Discharge. — If, with respect to the House in- 
volved, the committee has not reported the bill by the date 
required by subparagraph (A), the committee shall be dis- 
charged from further consideration of the proposal. 
"(3) Limitation on changes to the board recommenda- 
tions. — 

"(A) In general. — It shall not be in order in the Sen- 
ate or the House of Representatives to consider any bill, 
resolution, or amendment, pursuant to this subsection or 
conference report thereon, that fails to satisfy the require- 
ments of subparagraphs (A)(i) and (C) of subsection (c)(2). 

"(B) Limitation on changes to the board rec- 
ommendations in other legislation. — It shall not be in 
order in the Senate or the House of Representatives to con- 
sider any bill, resolution, amendment, or conference report 
(other than pursuant to this section) that would repeal or 
otherwise change the recommendations of the Board if 
that change would fail to satisfy the requirements of sub- 
paragraphs (A)(i) and (C) of subsection (c)(2). 

"(C) Limitation on changes to this subsection. — It 
shall not be in order in the Senate or the House of Rep- 
resentatives to consider any bill, resolution, amendment, 
or conference report that would repeal or otherwise change 
this subsection. 

"(D) Waiver. — This paragraph may be waived or sus- 
pended in the Senate only by the affirmative vote of three- 
fifths of the Members, duly chosen and sworn. 

"(E) Appeals. — An affirmative vote of three-fifths of 
the Members of the Senate, duly chosen and sworn, shall 
be required in the Senate to sustain an appeal of the rul- 
ing of the Chair on a point of order raised under this para- 
graph. 

"(4) Expedited procedure. — 

"(A) Consideration. — A motion to proceed to the con- 
sideration of the bill in the Senate is not debatable. 
"(B) Amendment. — 

"(i) Time limitation. — Debate in the Senate on 
any amendment to a bill under this section shall be 
limited to 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and 
controlled by, the mover and the manager of the bill, 
and debate on any amendment to an amendment, de- 
batable motion, or appeal shall be limited to 30 min- 
utes, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, 
the mover and the manager of the bill, except that in 
the event the manager of the bill is in favor of any 
such amendment, motion, or appeal, the time in oppo- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



416 



sition thereto shall be controlled by the minority lead- 
er or such leader's designee. 

"(ii) Germane. — No amendment that is not ger- 
mane to the provisions of such bill shall be received. 

"(hi) Additional time. — The leaders, or either of 
them, may, from the time under their control on the 
passage of the bill, allot additional time to any Sen- 
ator during the consideration of any amendment, de- 
batable motion, or appeal. 

"(iv) Amendment not in order. — It shall not be 
in order to consider an amendment that would cause 
the bill to result in a net reduction in total Medicare 
program spending in the implementation year that is 
less than the applicable savings target established 
under subsection (c)(7)(B) for such implementation 
year. 

"(v) Waiver and appeals. — This paragraph may 
be waived or suspended in the Senate only by the af- 
firmative vote of three-fifths of the Members, duly cho- 
sen and sworn. An affirmative vote of three-fifths of 
the Members of the Senate, duly chosen and sworn, 
shall be required in the Senate to sustain an appeal 
of the ruling of the Chair on a point of order raised 
under this section. 

"(C) Consideration by the other house. — 

"(i) In general. — The expedited procedures pro- 
vided in this subsection for the consideration of a bill 
introduced pursuant to paragraph (1) shall not apply 
to such a bill that is received by one House from the 
other House if such a bill was not introduced in the 
receiving House. 

"(ii) Before passage. — If a bill that is introduced 
pursuant to paragraph (1) is received by one House 
from the other House, after introduction but before 
disposition of such a bill in the receiving House, then 
the following shall apply: 

"(I) The receiving House shall consider the bill 
introduced in that House through all stages of 
consideration up to, but not including, passage. 

"(II) The question on passage shall be put on 
the bill of the other House as amended by the lan- 
guage of the receiving House, 
"(hi) After passage. — If a bill introduced pursu- 
ant to paragraph (1) is received by one House from the 
other House, after such a bill is passed by the receiv- 
ing House, then the vote on passage of the bill that 
originates in the receiving House shall be considered 
to be the vote on passage of the bill received from the 
other House as amended by the language of the receiv- 
ing House. 

"(iv) Disposition. — Upon disposition of a bill in- 
troduced pursuant to paragraph (1) that is received by 
one House from the other House, it shall no longer be 

June 9, 2010 



417 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



in order to consider the bill that originates in the re- 
ceiving House. 

"(v) Limitation. — Clauses (ii), (iii), and (iv) shall 
apply only to a bill received by one House from the 
other House if the bill — 

"(I) is related only to the program under this 

title; and 

"(II) satisfies the requirements of subpara- 
graphs (A)(i) and (C) of subsection (c)(2). 
"(D) Senate limits on debate. — 

"(i) In general. — In the Senate, consideration of 
the bill and on all debatable motions and appeals in 
connection therewith shall not exceed a total of 30 
hours, which shall be divided equally between the ma- 
jority and minority leaders or their designees. 

"(ii) Motion to further limit debate. — A mo- 
tion to further limit debate on the bill is in order and 
is not debatable. 

"(iii) Motion or appeal. — Any debatable motion 
or appeal is debatable for not to exceed 1 hour, to be 
divided equally between those favoring and those op- 
posing the motion or appeal. 

"(iv) Final disposition. — After 30 hours of consid- 
eration, the Senate shall proceed, without any further 
debate on any question, to vote on the final disposition 
thereof to the exclusion of all amendments not then 
pending before the Senate at that time and to the ex- 
clusion of all motions, except a motion to table, or to 
reconsider and one quorum call on demand to estab- 
lish the presence of a quorum (and motions required 
to establish a quorum) immediately before the final 
vote begins. 

"(E) Consideration in conference. — 

"(i) In general. — Consideration in the Senate and 
the House of Representatives on the conference report 
or any messages between Houses shall be limited to 
10 hours, equally divided and controlled by the major- 
ity and minority leaders of the Senate or their des- 
ignees and the Speaker of the House of Representa- 
tives and the minority leader of the House of Rep- 
resentatives or their designees. 

"(ii) Time limitation. — Debate in the Senate on 
any amendment under this subparagraph shall be lim- 
ited to 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and con- 
trolled by, the mover and the manager of the bill, and 
debate on any amendment to an amendment, debat- 
able motion, or appeal shall be limited to 30 minutes, 
to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the 
mover and the manager of the bill, except that in the 
event the manager of the bill is in favor of any such 
amendment, motion, or appeal, the time in opposition 
thereto shall be controlled by the minority leader or 
such leader's designee. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



418 



"(iii) Final disposition. — After 10 hours of con- 
sideration, the Senate shall proceed, without any fur- 
ther debate on any question, to vote on the final dis- 
position thereof to the exclusion of all motions not 
then pending before the Senate at that time or nec- 
essary to resolve the differences between the Houses 
and to the exclusion of all other motions, except a mo- 
tion to table, or to reconsider and one quorum call on 
demand to establish the presence of a quorum (and 
motions required to establish a quorum) immediately 
before the final vote begins. 

"(iv) Limitation. — Clauses (i) through (iii) shall 
only apply to a conference report, message or the 
amendments thereto if the conference report, message, 
or an amendment thereto — 

"(I) is related only to the program under this 

title; and 

"(II) satisfies the requirements of subpara- 
graphs (A)(i) and (C) of subsection (c)(2). 
"(F) Veto. — If the President vetoes the bill debate on 
a veto message in the Senate under this subsection shall 
be 1 hour equally divided between the majority and minor- 
ity leaders or their designees. 

"(5) Rules of the senate and house of representa- 
tives. — This subsection and subsection (f)(2) are enacted by 
Congress — 

"(A) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the 
Senate and the House of Representatives, respectively, and 
is deemed to be part of the rules of each House, respec- 
tively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to 
be followed in that House in the case of bill under this sec- 
tion, and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that 
it is inconsistent with such rules; and 

"(B) with full recognition of the constitutional right of 
either House to change the rules (so far as they relate to 
the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same 
manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other 
rule of that House. 
"(e) Implementation of Proposal. — 

"(1) In general. — Notwithstanding any other provision of 
law, the Secretary shall, except as provided in paragraph (3), 
implement the recommendations contained in a proposal sub- 
mitted by the Board or the President to Congress pursuant to 
this section on August 15 of the year in which the proposal is 
so submitted. 

"(2) Application. — 

"(A) In general. — A recommendation described in 
paragraph (1) shall apply as follows: 

"(i) In the case of a recommendation that is a 
change in the payment rate for an item or service 
under Medicare in which payment rates change on a 
fiscal year basis (or a cost reporting period basis that 
relates to a fiscal year), on a calendar year basis (or 
a cost reporting period basis that relates to a calendar 

June 9, 2010 



419 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3403M899A SSA 



year), or on a rate year basis (or a cost reporting pe- 
riod basis that relates to a rate year), such rec- 
ommendation shall apply to items and services fur- 
nished on the first day of the first fiscal year, calendar 
year, or rate year (as the case may be) that begins 
after such August 15. 

"(ii) In the case of a recommendation relating to 
payments to plans under parts C and D, such rec- 
ommendation shall apply to plan years beginning on 
the first day of the first calendar year that begins 
after such August 15. 

"(hi) In the case of any other recommendation, 
such recommendation shall be addressed in the reg- 
ular regulatory process timeframe and shall apply as 
soon as practicable. 

"(B) Interim final rulemaking. — The Secretary may 
use interim final rulemaking to implement any rec- 
ommendation described in paragraph (1). 
"(3) Exceptions. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall not implement 
the recommendations contained in a proposal submitted in 
a proposal year by the Board or the President to Congress 
pursuant to this section if — 

"(i) prior to August 15 of the proposal year, Fed- 
eral legislation is enacted that includes the following 
provision: 'This Act supercedes the recommendations 
of the Board contained in the proposal submitted, in 
the year which includes the date of enactment of this 
Act, to Congress under section 1899A of the Social Se- 
curity Act.'; and 

"(ii) in the case of implementation year 2020 and 
subsequent implementation years, a joint resolution 
described in subsection (f)(1) is enacted not later than 
August 15, 2017. 

"(B) Limited additional exception. — [As added by 
section 10320(a)(3)(B)] 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), the Sec- 
retary shall not implement the recommendations con- 
tained in a proposal submitted by the Board or the 
President to Congress pursuant to this section in a 
proposal year (beginning with proposal year 2019) if — 
"(I) the Board was required to submit a pro- 
posal to Congress under this section in the year 
preceding the proposal year; and 

"(II) the Chief Actuary of the Centers for 
Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services makes a determina- 
tion in the determination year that the growth 
rate described in subsection (c)(8) exceeds the 
growth rate described in subsection (c)(6)(A)(i). 
"(ii) Limited additional exception may not be 
applied in two consecutive years. — This subpara- 
graph shall not apply if the recommendations con- 
tained in a proposal submitted by the Board or the 
President to Congress pursuant to this section in the 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



420 



year preceding the proposal year were not required to 
be implemented by reason of this subparagraph. 

"(hi) NO AFFECT ON REQUIREMENT TO SUBMIT PRO- 
POSALS OR FOR CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF 

proposals. — Clause (i) and (ii) shall not affect — 

"(I) the requirement of the Board or the Presi- 
dent to submit a proposal to Congress in a pro- 
posal year in accordance with the provisions of 
this section; or 

"(II) Congressional consideration of a legisla- 
tive proposal (described in subsection (c)(3)(B)(iv)) 
contained such a proposal in accordance with sub- 
section (d). 

"(4) NO AFFECT ON AUTHORITY TO IMPLEMENT CERTAIN PRO- 
VISIONS. — Nothing in paragraph (3) shall be construed to affect 
the authority of the Secretary to implement any recommenda- 
tion contained in a proposal or advisory report under this sec- 
tion to the extent that the Secretary otherwise has the author- 
ity to implement such recommendation administratively. 

"(5) Limitation on review. — There shall be no adminis- 
trative or judicial review under section 1869, section 1878, or 
otherwise of the implementation by the Secretary under this 
subsection of the recommendations contained in a proposal. 
"(f) Joint Resolution Required To Discontinue the 
Board. — 

"(1) In general. — For purposes of subsection (e)(3)(B), a 
joint resolution described in this paragraph means only a joint 
resolution — 

"(A) that is introduced in 2017 by not later than Feb- 
ruary 1 of such year; 

"(B) which does not have a preamble; 

"(C) the title of which is as follows: 'Joint resolution 
approving the discontinuation of the process for consider- 
ation and automatic implementation of the annual pro- 
posal of the Independent Medicare Advisory Board under 
section 1899A of the Social Security Act'; and 

"(D) the matter after the resolving clause of which is 
as follows: 'That Congress approves the discontinuation of 
the process for consideration and automatic implementa- 
tion of the annual proposal of the Independent Medicare 
Advisory Board under section 1899A of the Social Security 
Act.'. 

"(2) Procedure. — 

"(A) Referral. — A joint resolution described in para- 
graph (1) shall be referred to the Committee on Ways and 
Means and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the 
House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance 
of the Senate. 

"(B) Discharge. — In the Senate, if the committee to 
which is referred a joint resolution described in paragraph 
(1) has not reported such joint resolution (or an identical 
joint resolution) at the end of 20 days after the joint reso- 
lution described in paragraph (1) is introduced, such com- 
mittee may be discharged from further consideration of 

June 9, 2010 



421 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



such joint resolution upon a petition supported in writing 
by 30 Members of the Senate, and such joint resolution 
shall be placed on the calendar. 
"(C) Consideration. — 

"(i) In general. — In the Senate, when the com- 
mittee to which a joint resolution is referred has re- 
ported, or when a committee is discharged (under sub- 
paragraph (C)) from further consideration of a joint 
resolution described in paragraph (1), it is at any time 
thereafter in order (even though a previous motion to 
the same effect has been disagreed to) for a motion to 
proceed to the consideration of the joint resolution to 
be made, and all points of order against the joint reso- 
lution (and against consideration of the joint resolu- 
tion) are waived, except for points of order under the 
Congressional Budget act of 1974 or under budget res- 
olutions pursuant to that Act. The motion is not debat- 
able. A motion to reconsider the vote by which the mo- 
tion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order. 
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of the joint 
resolution is agreed to, the joint resolution shall re- 
main the unfinished business of the Senate until dis- 
posed of. 

"(ii) Debate limitation. — In the Senate, consider- 
ation of the joint resolution, and on all debatable mo- 
tions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be 
limited to not more than 10 hours, which shall be di- 
vided equally between the majority leader and the mi- 
nority leader, or their designees. A motion further to 
limit debate is in order and not debatable. An amend- 
ment to, or a motion to postpone, or a motion to pro- 
ceed to the consideration of other business, or a mo- 
tion to recommit the joint resolution is not in order. 

"(hi) Passage. — In the Senate, immediately fol- 
lowing the conclusion of the debate on a joint resolu- 
tion described in paragraph (1), and a single quorum 
call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in ac- 
cordance with the rules of the Senate, the vote on pas- 
sage of the joint resolution shall occur. 

"(iv) Appeals. — Appeals from the decisions of the 
Chair relating to the application of the rules of the 
Senate to the procedure relating to a joint resolution 
described in paragraph (1) shall be decided without 
debate. 

"(D) Other house acts first. — If, before the passage 
by 1 House of a joint resolution of that House described in 
paragraph (1), that House receives from the other House 
a joint resolution described in paragraph (1), then the fol- 
lowing procedures shall apply: 

"(i) The joint resolution of the other House shall 
not be referred to a committee. 

"(ii) With respect to a joint resolution described in 
paragraph (1) of the House receiving the joint resolu- 
tion — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



422 



"(I) the procedure in that House shall be the 
same as if no joint resolution had been received 
from the other House; but 

"(II) the vote on final passage shall be on the 
joint resolution of the other House. 
"(E) Excluded days. — For purposes of determining 
the period specified in subparagraph (B), there shall be ex- 
cluded any days either House of Congress is adjourned for 
more than 3 days during a session of Congress. 

"(F) Majority required for adoption. — A joint reso- 
lution considered under this subsection shall require an af- 
firmative vote of three-fifths of the Members, duly chosen 
and sworn, for adoption. 

"(3) Termination. — If a joint resolution described in para- 
graph (1) is enacted not later than August 15, 2017 — 

"(A) the Chief Actuary of the Medicare &amp; Medicaid 
Services shall not — 

"(i) make any determinations under subsection 
(c)(6) after May 1, 2017; or 

"(ii) provide any opinion pursuant to subsection 
(c)(3)(B)(iii) after January 16, 2018; 
"(B) the Board shall not submit any proposals, advi- 
sory reports, or advisory recommendations under this sec- 
tion or produce the public report under subsection (n) after 
January 16, 2018; and 
[Subparagraph (B) amended by section 10320(a)(4); section 
10320(c) provides: 'Nothing in the amendments made by this section 
shall preclude the Independent Medicare Advisory Board, as estab- 
lished under section 1899 A of the Social Security Act (as added by 
section 3403), from solely using data from public or private sources 
to carry out the amendments made by subsection (a)(4). '] 

"(C) the Board and the consumer advisory council 
under subsection (k) shall terminate on August 16, 2018. 
"(g) Board Membership; Terms of Office; Chairperson; Re- 
moval. — 

"(1) Membership. — 

"(A) In general. — The Board shall be composed of— 
"(i) 15 members appointed by the President, by 
and with the advice and consent of the Senate; and 

"(ii) the Secretary, the Administrator of the Cen- 
ter for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services, and the Admin- 
istrator of the Health Resources and Services Adminis- 
tration, all of whom shall serve ex officio as nonvoting 
members of the Board. 
"(B) Qualifications. — 

"(i) In general. — The appointed membership of 
the Board shall include individuals with national rec- 
ognition for their expertise in health finance and eco- 
nomics, actuarial science, health facility management, 
health plans and integrated delivery systems, reim- 
bursement of health facilities, allopathic and osteo- 
pathic physicians, and other providers of health serv- 
ices, and other related fields, who provide a mix of dif- 
ferent professionals, broad geographic representation, 

June 9, 2010 



423 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



and a balance between urban and rural representa- 
tives. 

"(ii) Inclusion. — The appointed membership of 
the Board shall include (but not be limited to) physi- 
cians and other health professionals, experts in the 
area of pharmaco-economics or prescription drug ben- 
efit programs, employers, third-party payers, individ- 
uals skilled in the conduct and interpretation of bio- 
medical, health services, and health economics re- 
search and expertise in outcomes and effectiveness re- 
search and technology assessment. Such membership 
shall also include representatives of consumers and 
the elderly. 

"(hi) Majority nonproviders. — Individuals who 
are directly involved in the provision or management 
of the delivery of items and services covered under 
this title shall not constitute a majority of the ap- 
pointed membership of the Board. 
"(C) Ethical disclosure— The President shall estab- 
lish a system for public disclosure by appointed members 
of the Board of financial and other potential conflicts of in- 
terest relating to such members. Appointed members of 
the Board shall be treated as officers in the executive 
branch for purposes of applying title I of the Ethics in Gov- 
ernment Act of 1978 (Public Law 95-521). 

"(D) Conflicts of interest. — No individual may 
serve as an appointed member if that individual engages 
in any other business, vocation, or employment. 

"(E) Consultation with congress. — In selecting in- 
dividuals for nominations for appointments to the Board, 
the President shall consult with — 

"(i) the majority leader of the Senate concerning 
the appointment of 3 members; 

"(ii) the Speaker of the House of Representatives 
concerning the appointment of 3 members; 

"(hi) the minority leader of the Senate concerning 
the appointment of 3 members; and 

"(iv) the minority leader of the House of Rep- 
resentatives concerning the appointment of 3 mem- 
bers. 

"(2) Term of office. — Each appointed member shall hold 
office for a term of 6 years except that — 

"(A) a member may not serve more than 2 full con- 
secutive terms (but may be reappointed to 2 full consecu- 
tive terms after being appointed to fill a vacancy on the 
Board); 

"(B) a member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring 
prior to the expiration of the term for which that member's 
predecessor was appointed shall be appointed for the re- 
mainder of such term; 

"(C) a member may continue to serve after the expira- 
tion of the member's term until a successor has taken of- 
fice; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



424 



"(D) of the members first appointed under this section, 
5 shall be appointed for a term of 1 year, 5 shall be ap- 
pointed for a term of 3 years, and 5 shall be appointed for 
a term of 6 years, the term of each to be designated by the 
President at the time of nomination. 
"(3) Chairperson. — 

"(A) In general. — The Chairperson shall be appointed 
by the President, by and with the advice and consent of 
the Senate, from among the members of the Board. 

"(B) Duties. — The Chairperson shall be the principal 
executive officer of the Board, and shall exercise all of the 
executive and administrative functions of the Board, in- 
cluding functions of the Board with respect to — 

"(i) the appointment and supervision of personnel 

employed by the Board; 

"(ii) the distribution of business among personnel 

appointed and supervised by the Chairperson and 

among administrative units of the Board; and 
"(hi) the use and expenditure of funds. 

"(C) Governance. — In carrying out any of the func- 
tions under subparagraph (B), the Chairperson shall be 
governed by the general policies established by the Board 
and by the decisions, findings, and determinations the 
Board shall by law be authorized to make. 

"(D) Requests for appropriations. — Requests or es- 
timates for regular, supplemental, or deficiency appropria- 
tions on behalf of the Board may not be submitted by the 
Chairperson without the prior approval of a majority vote 
of the Board. 

"(4) Removal. — Any appointed member may be removed 
by the President for neglect of duty or malfeasance in office, 
but for no other cause. 

"(h) Vacancies; Quorum; Seal; Vice Chairperson; Voting 
on Reports. — 

"(1) Vacancies. — No vacancy on the Board shall impair 
the right of the remaining members to exercise all the powers 
of the Board. 

"(2) Quorum. — A majority of the appointed members of the 
Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of busi- 
ness, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings. 

"(3) Seal. — The Board shall have an official seal, of which 
judicial notice shall be taken. 

"(4) Vice chairperson. — The Board shall annually elect a 
Vice Chairperson to act in the absence or disability of the 
Chairperson or in case of a vacancy in the office of the Chair- 
person. 

"(5) Voting on proposals. — Any proposal of the Board 
must be approved by the majority of appointed members 
present. 

"(i) Powers of the Board. — 

"(1) Hearings. — The Board may hold such hearings, sit 
and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and re- 
ceive such evidence as the Board considers advisable to carry 
out this section. 

June 9, 2010 



425 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



"(2) Authority to inform research priorities for data 
collection. — The Board may advise the Secretary on prior- 
ities for health services research, particularly as such priorities 
pertain to necessary changes and issues regarding payment re- 
forms under Medicare. 

"(3) Obtaining official data. — The Board may secure di- 
rectly from any department or agency of the United States in- 
formation necessary to enable it to carry out this section. Upon 
request of the Chairperson, the head of that department or 
agency shall furnish that information to the Board on an 
agreed upon schedule. 

"(4) Postal services. — The Board may use the United 
States mails in the same manner and under the same condi- 
tions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Gov- 
ernment. 

"(5) Gifts. — The Board may accept, use, and dispose of 
gifts or donations of services or property. 

"(6) Offices. — The Board shall maintain a principal office 
and such field offices as it determines necessary, and may meet 
and exercise any of its powers at any other place, 
"(j) Personnel Matters. — 

"(1) Compensation of members and chairperson. — Each 
appointed member, other than the Chairperson, shall be com- 
pensated at a rate equal to the annual rate of basic pay pre- 
scribed for level III of the Executive Schedule under section 
5315 of title 5, United States Code. The Chairperson shall be 
compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the an- 
nual rate of basic pay prescribed for level II of the Executive 
Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code. 

"(2) Travel expenses. — The appointed members shall be 
allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsist- 
ence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under sub- 
chapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while 
away from their homes or regular places of business in the per- 
formance of services for the Board. 

"(3) Staff.— 

"(A) In general. — The Chairperson may, without re- 
gard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and 
terminate an executive director and such other additional 
personnel as may be necessary to enable the Board to per- 
form its duties. The employment of an executive director 
shall be subject to confirmation by the Board. 

"(B) Compensation. — The Chairperson may fix the 
compensation of the executive director and other personnel 
without regard to chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 
53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification 
of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that 
the rate of pay for the executive director and other per- 
sonnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the 
Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title. 
"(4) Detail of government employees. — Any Federal 
Government employee may be detailed to the Board without 
reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption 
or loss of civil service status or privilege. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3403U899A SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



426 



"(5) Procurement of temporary and intermittent 
SERVICES. — The Chairperson may procure temporary and inter- 
mittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States 
Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily 
equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level 
V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title, 
"(k) Consumer Advisory Council. — 

"(1) In general. — There is established a consumer advi- 
sory council to advise the Board on the impact of payment poli- 
cies under this title on consumers. 
"(2) Membership. — 

"(A) Number and appointment. — The consumer advi- 
sory council shall be composed of 10 consumer representa- 
tives appointed by the Comptroller General of the United 
States, 1 from among each of the 10 regions established by 
the Secretary as of the date of enactment of this section. 

"(B) Qualifications. — The membership of the council 
shall represent the interests of consumers and particular 
communities. 

"(3) Duties. — The consumer advisory council shall, subject 
to the call of the Board, meet not less frequently than 2 times 
each year in the District of Columbia. 

"(4) Open meetings. — Meetings of the consumer advisory 
council shall be open to the public. 

"(5) Election of officers. — Members of the consumer ad- 
visory council shall elect their own officers. 

"(6) Application of faca. — The Federal Advisory Com- 
mittee Act (5 U.S.C. App.) shall apply to the consumer advisory 
council except that section 14 of such Act shall not apply. 
"(1) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(1) Board; chairperson; member. — The terms 'Board', 
'Chairperson', and 'Member' mean the Independent Medicare 
Advisory Board established under subsection (a) and the 
Chairperson and any Member thereof, respectively. 

"(2) Medicare. — The term 'Medicare' means the program 
established under this title, including parts A, B, C, and D. 

"(3) Medicare beneficiary. — The term 'Medicare bene- 
ficiary' means an individual who is entitled to, or enrolled for, 
benefits under part A or enrolled for benefits under part B. 

"(4) Medicare program spending. — The term 'Medicare 
program spending" means program spending under parts A, B, 
and D net of premiums, 
"(m) Funding. — 

"(1) In general. — There are appropriated to the Board to 
carry out its duties and functions — 

"(A) for fiscal year 2012, $15,000,000; and 
"(B) for each subsequent fiscal year, the amount ap- 
propriated under this paragraph for the previous fiscal 
year increased by the annual percentage increase in the 
Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (all items; 
United States city average) as of June of the previous fis- 
cal year. 

"(2) From trust funds. — Sixty percent of amounts appro- 
priated under paragraph (1) shall be derived by transfer from 

June 9, 2010 



427 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3403M899A SSA 



the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under section 1817 
and 40 percent of amounts appropriated under such paragraph 
shall be derived by transfer from the Federal Supplementary 
Medical Insurance Trust Fund under section 1841. 
"(n) Annual Public Report. — [As added by section 
10320(a)(5)! 

"(1) In general. — Not later than July 1, 2014, and annu- 
ally thereafter, the Board shall produce a public report con- 
taining standardized information on system-wide health care 
costs, patient access to care, utilization, and quality-of-care 
that allows for comparison by region, types of services, types 
of providers, and both private payers and the program under 
this title. 

"(2) Requirements. — Each report produced pursuant to 
paragraph (1) shall include information with respect to the fol- 
lowing areas: 

"(A) The quality and costs of care for the population at 
the most local level determined practical by the Board 
(with quality and costs compared to national benchmarks 
and reflecting rates of change, taking into account quality 
measures described in section 1890(b)(7)(B)). 

"(B) Beneficiary and consumer access to care, patient 
and caregiver experience of care, and the cost-sharing or 
out-of-pocket burden on patients. 

"(C) Epidemiological shifts and demographic changes. 
"(D) The proliferation, effectiveness, and utilization of 
health care technologies, including variation in provider 
practice patterns and costs. 

"(E) Any other areas that the Board determines affect 
overall spending and quality of care in the private sector, 
"(o) Advisory Recommendations for Non-Federal Health 
Care Programs— [As added by section 10320(a)(5)! 

"(1) In general. — Not later than January 15, 2015, and at 
least once every two years thereafter, the Board shall submit 
to Congress and the President recommendations to slow the 
growth in national health expenditures (excluding expendi- 
tures under this title and in other Federal health care pro- 
grams) while preserving or enhancing quality of care, such as 
recommendations — 

"(A) that the Secretary or other Federal agencies can 
implement administratively; 

"(B) that may require legislation to be enacted by Con- 
gress in order to be implemented; 

"(C) that may require legislation to be enacted by 
State or local governments in order to be implemented; 

"(D) that private sector entities can voluntarily imple- 
ment; and 

"(E) with respect to other areas determined appro- 
priate by the Board. 

"(2) Coordination. — In making recommendations under 
paragraph (1), the Board shall coordinate such recommenda- 
tions with recommendations contained in proposals and advi- 
sory reports produced by the Board under subsection (c). 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3403 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



428 



"(3) Available to public. — The Board shall make rec- 
ommendations submitted to Congress and the President under 
this subsection available to the public". 

(2) Lobbying cooling-off period for members of the 

INDEPENDENT MEDICARE ADVISORY BOARD. — Section 207(c) of 

title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting at the 
end the following: 

"(3) Members of the independent medicare advisory 

BOARD. — 

"(A) In general. — Paragraph (1) shall apply to a 
member of the Independent Medicare Advisory Board 
under section 1899A. 

"(B) Agencies and congress. — For purposes of para- 
graph (1), the agency in which the individual described in 
subparagraph (A) served shall be considered to be the 
Independent Medicare Advisory Board, the Department of 
Health and Human Services, and the relevant committees 
of jurisdiction of Congress, including the Committee on 
Ways and Means and the Committee on Energy and Com- 
merce of the House of Representatives and the Committee 
on Finance of the Senate.", 
(b) GAO Study and Report on Determination and Imple- 
mentation of Payment and Coverage Policies Under the 
Medicare Program. — 

(1) Initial study and report. — 

(A) Study. — The Comptroller General of the United 
States (in this section referred to as the "Comptroller Gen- 
eral") shall conduct a study on changes to payment poli- 
cies, methodologies, and rates and coverage policies and 
methodologies under the Medicare program under title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act as a result of the rec- 
ommendations contained in the proposals made by the 
Independent Medicare Advisory Board under section 
1899A of such Act (as added by subsection (a)), including 
an analysis of the effect of such recommendations on — 

(i) Medicare beneficiary access to providers and 
items and services; 

(ii) the affordability of Medicare premiums and 
cost-sharing (including deductibles, coinsurance, and 
copayments); 

(hi) the potential impact of changes on other gov- 
ernment or private-sector purchasers and payers of 
care; and 

(iv) quality of patient care, including patient expe- 
rience, outcomes, and other measures of care. 

(B) Report— Not later than July 1, 2015, the Comp- 
troller General shall submit to Congress a report con- 
taining the results of the study conducted under subpara- 
graph (A), together with recommendations for such legisla- 
tion and administrative action as the Comptroller General 
determines appropriate. 

(2) Subsequent studies and reports. — The Comptroller 
General shall periodically conduct such additional studies and 
submit reports to Congress on changes to Medicare payments 

June 9, 2010 



429 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3501X933 PHSA 



policies, methodologies, and rates and coverage policies and 
methodologies as the Comptroller General determines appro- 
priate, in consultation with the Committee on Ways and Means 
and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate, 
(c) Conforming Amendments. — Section 1805(b) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395b-6(b)) is amended— 

(1) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (8) as para- 
graphs (5) through (9), respectively; and 

(2) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following: 

"(4) Review and comment on the independent medi- 
care advisory board or secretarial proposal. — If the Inde- 
pendent Medicare Advisory Board (as established under sub- 
section (a) of section 1899A) or the Secretary submits a pro- 
posal to the Commission under such section in a year, the 
Commission shall review the proposal and, not later than 
March 1 of that year, submit to the Committee on Ways and 
Means and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the 
House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the 
Senate written comments on such proposal. Such comments 
may include such recommendations as the Commission deems 
appropriate.". 

Subtitle F— Health Care Quality 
Improvements 

SEC. 3501. HEALTH CARE DELIVERY SYSTEM RESEARCH; QUALITY IM- 
PROVEMENT TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE. 

Part D of title IX of the Public Health Service Act, as amended 
by section 3013, is further amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing: 

"Subpart II — Health Care Quality Improvement 

Programs 

"SEC. 933 [42 U.S.C. 299b-33]. HEALTH CARE DELIVERY SYSTEM RE- 
SEARCH. 

"(a) Purpose. — The purposes of this section are to — 

"(1) enable the Director to identify, develop, evaluate, dis- 
seminate, and provide training in innovative methodologies 
and strategies for quality improvement practices in the deliv- 
ery of health care services that represent best practices (re- 
ferred to as 'best practices') in health care quality, safety, and 
value; and 

"(2) ensure that the Director is accountable for imple- 
menting a model to pursue such research in a collaborative 
manner with other related Federal agencies. 
"(b) General Functions of the Center. — The Center for 
Quality Improvement and Patient Safety of the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality (referred to in this section as the 
'Center'), or any other relevant agency or department designated by 
the Director, shall — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3501X933 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



430 



"(1) carry out its functions using research from a variety 
of disciplines, which may include epidemiology, health services, 
sociology, psychology, human factors engineering, biostatistics, 
health economics, clinical research, and health informatics; 

"(2) conduct or support activities consistent with the pur- 
poses described in subsection (a), and for — 

"(A) best practices for quality improvement practices 
in the delivery of health care services; and 

"(B) that include changes in processes of care and the 
redesign of systems used by providers that will reliably re- 
sult in intended health outcomes, improve patient safety, 
and reduce medical errors (such as skill development for 
health care providers in team-based health care delivery 
and rapid cycle process improvement) and facilitate adop- 
tion of improved workflow; 

"(3) identify health care providers, including health care 
systems, single institutions, and individual providers, that — 

"(A) deliver consistently high-quality, efficient health 
care services (as determined by the Secretary); and 

"(B) employ best practices that are adaptable and scal- 
able to diverse health care settings or effective in improv- 
ing care across diverse settings; 

"(4) assess research, evidence, and knowledge about what 
strategies and methodologies are most effective in improving 
health care delivery; 

"(5) find ways to translate such information rapidly and ef- 
fectively into practice, and document the sustainability of those 
improvements; 

"(6) create strategies for quality improvement through the 
development of tools, methodologies, and interventions that 
can successfully reduce variations in the delivery of health 
care; 

"(7) identify, measure, and improve organizational, human, 
or other causative factors, including those related to the cul- 
ture and system design of a health care organization, that con- 
tribute to the success and sustainability of specific quality im- 
provement and patient safety strategies; 

"(8) provide for the development of best practices in the de- 
livery of health care services that — 

"(A) have a high likelihood of success, based on struc- 
tured review of empirical evidence; 

"(B) are specified with sufficient detail of the indi- 
vidual processes, steps, training, skills, and knowledge re- 
quired for implementation and incorporation into workflow 
of health care practitioners in a variety of settings; 

"(C) are designed to be readily adapted by health care 
providers in a variety of settings; and 

"(D) where applicable, assist health care providers in 
working with other health care providers across the con- 
tinuum of care and in engaging patients and their families 
in improving the care and patient health outcomes; 
"(9) provide for the funding of the activities of organiza- 
tions with recognized expertise and excellence in improving the 
delivery of health care services, including children's health 

June 9, 2010 



431 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3501X933 PHSA 



care, by involving multiple disciplines, managers of health care 
entities, broad development and training, patients, caregivers 
and families, and frontline health care workers, including ac- 
tivities for the examination of strategies to share best quality 
improvement practices and to promote excellence in the deliv- 
ery of health care services; and 

"(10) build capacity at the State and community level to 
lead quality and safety efforts through education, training, and 
mentoring programs to carry out the activities under para- 
graphs (1) through (9). 
"(c) Research Functions of Center. — 

"(1) In general. — The Center shall support, such as 
through a contract or other mechanism, research on health 
care delivery system improvement and the development of 
tools to facilitate adoption of best practices that improve the 
quality, safety, and efficiency of health care delivery services. 
Such support may include establishing a Quality Improvement 
Network Research Program for the purpose of testing, scaling, 
and disseminating of interventions to improve quality and effi- 
ciency in health care. Recipients of funding under the Program 
may include national, State, multi-State, or multi-site quality 
improvement networks. 

"(2) Research requirements. — The research conducted 
pursuant to paragraph (1) shall — 

"(A) address the priorities identified by the Secretary 

in the national strategic plan established under section 

399HH; 

"(B) identify areas in which evidence is insufficient to 
identify strategies and methodologies, taking into consider- 
ation areas of insufficient evidence identified by the entity 
with a contract under section 1890(a) of the Social Security 
Act in the report required under section 399JJ; 

"(C) address concerns identified by health care institu- 
tions and providers and communicated through the Center 
pursuant to subsection (d); 

"(D) reduce preventable morbidity, mortality, and as- 
sociated costs of morbidity and mortality by building ca- 
pacity for patient safety research; 

"(E) support the discovery of processes for the reliable, 
safe, efficient, and responsive delivery of health care, tak- 
ing into account discoveries from clinical research and 
comparative effectiveness research; 

"(F) allow communication of research findings and 
translate evidence into practice recommendations that are 
adaptable to a variety of settings, and which, as soon as 
practicable after the establishment of the Center, shall in- 
clude — 

"(i) the implementation of a national application of 
Intensive Care Unit improvement projects relating to 
the adult (including geriatric), pediatric, and neonatal 
patient populations; 

"(ii) practical methods for addressing health care 
associated infections, including Methicillin-Resistant 
Staphylococcus Aureus and Vancomycin-Resistant 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3501X933 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



432 



Entercoccus infections and other emerging infections; 
and 

"(hi) practical methods for reducing preventable 
hospital admissions and readmissions; 
"(G) expand demonstration projects for improving the 
quality of children's health care and the use of" health in- 
formation technology, such as through Pediatric Quality 
Improvement Collaboratives and Learning Networks, con- 
sistent with provisions of section 1139A of the Social Secu- 
rity Act for assessing and improving quality, where appli- 
cable; 

"(H) identify and mitigate hazards by — 

"(i) analyzing events reported to patient safety re- 
porting systems and patient safety organizations; and 
"(ii) using the results of such analyses to develop 
scientific methods of response to such events; 
"(I) include the conduct of systematic reviews of exist- 
ing practices that improve the quality, safety, and effi- 
ciency of health care delivery, as well as new research on 
improving such practices; and 

"(J) include the examination of how to measure and 
evaluate the progress of quality and patient safety activi- 
ties. 

"(d) Dissemination of Research Findings. — 

"(1) Public availability. — The Director shall make the re- 
search findings of the Center available to the public through 
multiple media and appropriate formats to reflect the varying 
needs of health care providers and consumers and diverse lev- 
els of health literacy. 

"(2) Linkage to health information technology. — The 
Secretary shall ensure that research findings and results gen- 
erated by the Center are shared with the Office of the National 
Coordinator of Health Information Technology and used to in- 
form the activities of the health information technology exten- 
sion program under section 3012, as well as any relevant 
standards, certification criteria, or implementation specifica- 
tions. 

"(e) Prioritization. — The Director shall identify and regularly 
update a list of processes or systems on which to focus research 
and dissemination activities of the Center, taking into account — 

"(1) the cost to Federal health programs; 

"(2) consumer assessment of health care experience; 

"(3) provider assessment of such processes or systems and 
opportunities to minimize distress and injury to the health 
care workforce; 

"(4) the potential impact of such processes or systems on 
health status and function of patients, including vulnerable 
populations including children; 

"(5) the areas of insufficient evidence identified under sub- 
section (c)(2)(B); and 

"(6) the evolution of meaningful use of health information 
technology, as defined in section 3000. 

"(f) Coordination. — The Center shall coordinate its activities 
with activities conducted by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid 

June 9, 2010 



433 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3503\934 PHSA 



Innovation established under section 1115A of the Social Security 
Act. 

"(g) Funding. — There is authorized to be appropriated to carry 
out this section $20,000,000 for fiscal years 2010 through 2014. 

"SEC. 934 [42 U.S.C. 299b-34]. QUALITY IMPROVEMENT TECHNICAL AS- 
SISTANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION. 

"(a) In General. — The Director, through the Center for Qual- 
ity Improvement and Patient Safety of the Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality (referred to in this section as the 'Center'), 
shall award — 

"(1) technical assistance grants or contracts to eligible enti- 
ties to provide technical support to institutions that deliver 
health care and health care providers (including rural and 
urban providers of services and suppliers with limited infra- 
structure and financial resources to implement and support 
quality improvement activities, providers of services and sup- 
pliers with poor performance scores, and providers of services 
and suppliers for which there are disparities in care among 
subgroups of patients) so that such institutions and providers 
understand, adapt, and implement the models and practices 
identified in the research conducted by the Center, including 
the Quality Improvement Networks Research Program; and 

"(2) implementation grants or contracts to eligible entities 
to implement the models and practices described under para- 
graph (1). 

"(b) Eligible Entities. — 

"(1) Technical assistance award. — To be eligible to re- 
ceive a technical assistance grant or contract under subsection 
(a)(1), an entity — 

"(A) may be a health care provider, health care pro- 
vider association, professional society, health care worker 
organization, Indian health organization, quality improve- 
ment organization, patient safety organization, local qual- 
ity improvement collaborative, the Joint Commission, aca- 
demic health center, university, physician-based research 
network, primary care extension program established 
under section 399V-1, a Federal Indian Health Service 
program or a health program operated by an Indian tribe 
(as denned in section 4 of the Indian Health Care Improve- 
ment Act), or any other entity identified by the Secretary; 
and [As revised by section 10501(f)(2)~\ 

"(B) shall have demonstrated expertise in providing in- 
formation and technical support and assistance to health 
care providers regarding quality improvement. 
"(2) Implementation award. — To be eligible to receive an 
implementation grant or contract under subsection (a)(2), an 
entity — 

"(A) may be a hospital or other health care provider or 
consortium or providers, as determined by the Secretary; 
and 

"(B) shall have demonstrated expertise in providing in- 
formation and technical support and assistance to health 
care providers regarding quality improvement. 
"(c) Application. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3503X934 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



434 



"(1) Technical assistance award. — To receive a technical 
assistance grant or contract under subsection (a)(1), an eligible 
entity shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 
time, in such manner, and containing — 

"(A) a plan for a sustainable business model that may 
include a system of — 

"(i) charging fees to institutions and providers 
that receive technical support from the entity; and 

"(ii) reducing or eliminating such fees for such in- 
stitutions and providers that serve low-income popu- 
lations; and 

"(B) such other information as the Director may re- 
quire. 

"(2) Implementation award. — To receive a grant or con- 
tract under subsection (a)(2), an eligible entity shall submit an 
application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and 
containing — 

"(A) a plan for implementation of a model or practice 
identified in the research conducted by the Center includ- 
ing— 

"(i) financial cost, staffing requirements, and 
timeline for implementation; and 

"(ii) pre- and projected post-implementation qual- 
ity measure performance data in targeted improve- 
ment areas identified by the Secretary; and 
"(B) such other information as the Director may re- 
quire. 

"(d) Matching Funds. — The Director may not award a grant 
or contract under this section to an entity unless the entity agrees 
that it will make available (directly or through contributions from 
other public or private entities) non-Federal contributions toward 
the activities to be carried out under the grant or contract in an 
amount equal to $1 for each $5 of Federal funds provided under the 
grant or contract. Such non-Federal matching funds may be pro- 
vided directly or through donations from public or private entities 
and may be in cash or in-kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, 
equipment, or services. 
"(e) Evaluation. — 

"(1) In general. — The Director shall evaluate the perform- 
ance of each entity that receives a grant or contract under this 
section. The evaluation of an entity shall include a study of — 
"(A) the success of such entity in achieving the imple- 
mentation, by the health care institutions and providers 
assisted by such entity, of the models and practices identi- 
fied in the research conducted by the Center under section 
933; 

"(B) the perception of the health care institutions and 
providers assisted by such entity regarding the value of 
the entity; and 

"(C) where practicable, better patient health outcomes 
and lower cost resulting from the assistance provided by 
such entity. 

"(2) Effect of evaluation. — Based on the outcome of the 
evaluation of the entity under paragraph (1), the Director shall 

June 9, 2010 



435 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3502 



determine whether to renew a grant or contract with such enti- 
ty under this section. 

"(f) Coordination. — The entities that receive a grant or con- 
tract under this section shall coordinate with health information 
technology regional extension centers under section 3012(c) and the 
primary care extension program established under section 399V-1 
regarding the dissemination of quality improvement, system deliv- 
ery reform, and best practices information. [As revised by section 
105010(2)1". 

SEC. 3502 [42 U.S.C. 256a-l]. ESTABLISHING COMMUNITY HEALTH 
TEAMS TO SUPPORT THE PATIENT-CENTERED MEDICAL 
HOME. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices (referred to in this section as the "Secretary") shall establish 
a program to provide grants to or enter into contracts with eligible 
entities to establish community-based interdisciplinary, interprofes- 
sional teams (referred to in this section as "health teams") to sup- 
port primary care practices, including obstetrics and gynecology 
practices, within the hospital service areas served by the eligible 
entities. Grants or contracts shall be used to — 

(1) establish health teams to provide support services to 
primary care providers; and 

(2) provide capitated payments to primary care providers 
as determined by the Secretary. 

(b) Eligible Entities. — To be eligible to receive a grant or 
contract under subsection (a), an entity shall — 

(1) (A) be a State or State-designated entity; or 

(B) be an Indian tribe or tribal organization, as denned in 
section 4 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act; 

(2) submit a plan for achieving long-term financial sustain- 
ability within 3 years; 

(3) submit a plan for incorporating prevention initiatives 
and patient education and care management resources into the 
delivery of health care that is integrated with community- 
based prevention and treatment resources, where available; 

(4) ensure that the health team established by the entity 
includes an interdisciplinary, interprofessional team of health 
care providers, as determined by the Secretary; such team may 
include medical specialists, nurses, pharmacists, nutritionists, 
dieticians, social workers, behavioral and mental health pro- 
viders (including substance use disorder prevention and treat- 
ment providers), doctors of chiropractic, licensed complemen- 
tary and alternative medicine practitioners, and physicians' as- 
sistants; 

(5) agree to provide services to eligible individuals with 
chronic conditions, as described in section 1945 of the Social 
Security Act (as added by section 2703), in accordance with the 
payment methodology established under subsection (c) of such 
section; and 

(6) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in 
such manner, and containing such information as the Sec- 
retary may require. 

(c) Requirements for Health Teams. — A health team estab- 
lished pursuant to a grant or contract under subsection (a) shall — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3502 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



436 



(1) establish contractual agreements with primary care 
providers to provide support services; 

(2) support patient-centered medical homes, defined as a 
mode of care that includes — 

(A) personal physicians or other primary care pro- 
viders; [As revised by section 1032T\ 

(B) whole person orientation; 

(C) coordinated and integrated care; 

(D) safe and high-quality care through evidence-in- 
formed medicine, appropriate use of health information 
technology, and continuous quality improvements; 

(E) expanded access to care; and 

(F) payment that recognizes added value from addi- 
tional components of patient-centered care; 

(3) collaborate with local primary care providers and exist- 
ing State and community based resources to coordinate disease 
prevention, chronic disease management, transitioning be- 
tween health care providers and settings and case manage- 
ment for patients, including children, with priority given to 
those amenable to prevention and with chronic diseases or con- 
ditions identified by the Secretary; 

(4) in collaboration with local health care providers, de- 
velop and implement interdisciplinary, interprofessional care 
plans that integrate clinical and community preventive and 
health promotion services for patients, including children, with 
a priority given to those amenable to prevention and with 
chronic diseases or conditions identified by the Secretary; 

(5) incorporate health care providers, patients, caregivers, 
and authorized representatives in program design and over- 
sight; 

(6) provide support necessary for local primary care pro- 
viders to — 

(A) coordinate and provide access to high-quality 
health care services; 

(B) coordinate and provide access to preventive and 
health promotion services; 

(C) provide access to appropriate specialty care and in- 
patient services; 

(D) provide quality-driven, cost-effective, culturally ap- 
propriate, and patient- and family-centered health care; 

(E) provide access to pharmacist-delivered medication 
management services, including medication reconciliation; 

(F) provide coordination of the appropriate use of com- 
plementary and alternative (CAM) services to those who 
request such services; 

(G) promote effective strategies for treatment plan- 
ning, monitoring health outcomes and resource use, shar- 
ing information, treatment decision support, and orga- 
nizing care to avoid duplication of service and other med- 
ical management approaches intended to improve quality 
and value of health care services; 

(H) provide local access to the continuum of health 
care services in the most appropriate setting, including ac- 
cess to individuals that implement the care plans of pa- 
June 9, 2010 



437 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3502 



tients and coordinate care, such as integrative health care 
practitioners; 

(I) collect and report data that permits evaluation of 
the success of the collaborative effort on patient outcomes, 
including collection of data on patient experience of care, 
and identification of areas for improvement; and 

(J) establish a coordinated system of early identifica- 
tion and referral for children at risk for developmental or 
behavioral problems such as through the use of infolines, 
health information technology, or other means as deter- 
mined by the Secretary; 

(7) provide 24-hour care management and support during 
transitions in care settings including — 

(A) a transitional care program that provides onsite 
visits from the care coordinator, assists with the develop- 
ment of discharge plans and medication reconciliation 
upon admission to and discharge from the hospitals, nurs- 
ing home, or other institution setting; 

(B) discharge planning and counseling support to pro- 
viders, patients, caregivers, and authorized representa- 
tives; 

(C) assuring that post-discharge care plans include 
medication management, as appropriate; 

(D) referrals for mental and behavioral health serv- 
ices, which may include the use of infolines; and 

(E) transitional health care needs from adolescence to 
adulthood; 

(8) serve as a liaison to community prevention and treat- 
ment programs; 

(9) demonstrate a capacity to implement and maintain 
health information technology that meets the requirements of 
certified EHR technology (as defined in section 3000 of the 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj)) to facilitate coordi- 
nation among members of the applicable care team and affili- 
ated primary care practices; and 

(10) where applicable, report to the Secretary information 
on quality measures used under section 399JJ of the Public 
Health Service Act. 

(d) Requirement for Primary Care Providers. — A provider 
who contracts with a care team shall — 

(1) provide a care plan to the care team for each patient 
participant; 

(2) provide access to participant health records; and 

(3) meet regularly with the care team to ensure integration 
of care. 

(e) Reporting to Secretary. — An entity that receives a grant 
or contract under subsection (a) shall submit to the Secretary a re- 
port that describes and evaluates, as requested by the Secretary, 
the activities carried out by the entity under subsection (c). 

(f) Definition of Primary Care. — In this section, the term 
"primary care" means the provision of integrated, accessible health 
care services by clinicians who are accountable for addressing a 
large majority of personal health care needs, developing a sus- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3503 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



438 



tained partnership with patients, and practicing in the context of 
family and community. 

SEC. 3503. MEDICATION MANAGEMENT SERVICES IN TREATMENT OF 
CHRONIC DISEASE. 

Title IX of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299 et 
seq.), as amended by section 3501, is further amended by inserting 
after section 934 the following: 

"SEC. 935 [42 U.S.C. 299b-35]. GRANTS OR CONTRACTS TO IMPLEMENT 
MEDICATION MANAGEMENT SERVICES IN TREATMENT OF 
CHRONIC DISEASES. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary, acting through the Patient 
Safety Research Center established in section 933 (referred to in 
this section as the 'Center'), shall establish a program to provide 
grants or contracts to eligible entities to implement medication 
management (referred to in this section as 'MTM') services pro- 
vided by licensed pharmacists, as a collaborative, multidisciplinary, 
inter-professional approach to the treatment of chronic diseases for 
targeted individuals, to improve the quality of care and reduce 
overall cost in the treatment of such diseases. The Secretary shall 
commence the program under this section not later than May 1, 
2010. 

"(b) Eligible Entities. — To be eligible to receive a grant or 
contract under subsection (a), an entity shall — 

"(1) provide a setting appropriate for MTM services, as rec- 
ommended by the experts described in subsection (e); 

"(2) submit to the Secretary a plan for achieving long-term 
financial sustainability; 

"(3) where applicable, submit a plan for coordinating MTM 
services through local community health teams established in 
section 3502 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 
or in collaboration with primary care extension programs es- 
tablished in section 399V-1; [As revised by section 10501(f)(3)~\ 

"(4) submit a plan for meeting the requirements under 
subsection (c); and 

"(5) submit to the Secretary such other information as the 
Secretary may require. 

"(c) MTM Services to Targeted Individuals. — The MTM 
services provided with the assistance of a grant or contract award- 
ed under subsection (a) shall, as allowed by State law including ap- 
plicable collaborative pharmacy practice agreements, include — 

"(1) performing or obtaining necessary assessments of the 

health and functional status of each patient receiving such 

MTM services; 

"(2) formulating a medication treatment plan according to 
therapeutic goals agreed upon by the prescriber and the pa- 
tient or caregiver or authorized representative of the patient; 

"(3) selecting, initiating, modifying, recommending changes 
to, or administering medication therapy; 

"(4) monitoring, which may include access to, ordering, or 
performing laboratory assessments, and evaluating the re- 
sponse of the patient to therapy, including safety and effective- 
ness; 

"(5) performing an initial comprehensive medication review 
to identify, resolve, and prevent medication-related problems, 

June 9, 2010 



439 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3503\935 PHSA 



including adverse drug events, quarterly targeted medication 
reviews for ongoing monitoring, and additional followup inter- 
ventions on a schedule developed collaboratively with the pre- 
scriber; 

"(6) documenting the care delivered and communicating es- 
sential information about such care, including a summary of 
the medication review, and the recommendations of the phar- 
macist to other appropriate health care providers of the patient 
in a timely fashion; 

"(7) providing education and training designed to enhance 
the understanding and appropriate use of the medications by 
the patient, caregiver, and other authorized representative; 

"(8) providing information, support services, and resources 
and strategies designed to enhance patient adherence with 
therapeutic regimens; 

"(9) coordinating and integrating MTM services within the 
broader health care management services provided to the pa- 
tient; and 

"(10) such other patient care services allowed under phar- 
macist scopes of practice in use in other Federal programs that 
have implemented MTM services. 

"(d) Targeted Individuals. — MTM services provided by li- 
censed pharmacists under a grant or contract awarded under sub- 
section (a) shall be offered to targeted individuals who — 

"(1) take 4 or more prescribed medications (including over- 
the-counter medications and dietary supplements); 
"(2) take any 'high risk' medications; 

"(3) have 2 or more chronic diseases, as identified by the 
Secretary; or 

"(4) have undergone a transition of care, or other factors, 
as determined by the Secretary, that are likely to create a high 
risk of medication-related problems. 

"(e) Consultation With Experts. — In designing and imple- 
menting MTM services provided under grants or contracts awarded 
under subsection (a), the Secretary shall consult with Federal, 
State, private, public-private, and academic entities, pharmacy and 
pharmacist organizations, health care organizations, consumer ad- 
vocates, chronic disease groups, and other stakeholders involved 
with the research, dissemination, and implementation of phar- 
macist-delivered MTM services, as the Secretary determines appro- 
priate. The Secretary, in collaboration with this group, shall deter- 
mine whether it is possible to incorporate rapid cycle process im- 
provement concepts in use in other Federal programs that have im- 
plemented MTM services. 

"(f) Reporting to the Secretary. — An entity that receives a 
grant or contract under subsection (a) shall submit to the Secretary 
a report that describes and evaluates, as requested by the Sec- 
retary, the activities carried out under subsection (c), including 
quality measures endorsed by the entity with a contract under sec- 
tion 1890 of the Social Security Act, as determined by the Sec- 
retary. 

"(g) Evaluation and Report. — The Secretary shall submit to 
the relevant committees of Congress a report which shall — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3504 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



440 



"(1) assess the clinical effectiveness of pharmacist-provided 
services under the MTM services program, as compared to 
usual care, including an evaluation of whether enrollees main- 
tained better health with fewer hospitalizations and emergency 
room visits than similar patients not enrolled in the program; 

"(2) assess changes in overall health care resource use by 
targeted individuals; 

"(3) assess patient and prescriber satisfaction with MTM 
services; 

"(4) assess the impact of patient-cost sharing requirements 
on medication adherence and recommendations for modifica- 
tions; 

"(5) identify and evaluate other factors that may impact 
clinical and economic outcomes, including demographic charac- 
teristics, clinical characteristics, and health services use of the 
patient, as well as characteristics of the regimen, pharmacy 
benefit, and MTM services provided; and 

"(6) evaluate the extent to which participating pharmacists 
who maintain a dispensing role have a conflict of interest in 
the provision of MTM services, and if such conflict is found, 
provide recommendations on how such a conflict might be ap- 
propriately addressed. 

"(h) Grants or Contracts To Fund Development of Per- 
formance Measures. — The Secretary may, through the quality 
measure development program under section 931 of the Public 
Health Service Act, award grants or contracts to eligible entities for 
the purpose of funding the development of performance measures 
that assess the use and effectiveness of medication therapy man- 
agement services.". 

SEC. 3504. DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF REGIONALIZED SYS- 
TEMS FOR EMERGENCY CARE. 

(a) In General.— Title XII of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 300d et seq.) is amended — 

(1) in section 1203— 

(A) in the section heading, by inserting "FOR TRAU- 
MA SYSTEMS" after "GRANTS"; and 

(B) in subsection (a), by striking "Administrator of the 
Health Resources and Services Administration" and insert- 
ing "Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response"; 

(2) by inserting after section 1203 the following: 

"SEC. 1204 [42 U.S.C. 300d-6]. COMPETITIVE GRANTS FOR REGIONAL- 
IZED SYSTEMS FOR EMERGENCY CARE RESPONSE. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary, acting through the Assistant 
Secretary for Preparedness and Response, shall award not fewer 
than 4 multiyear contracts or competitive grants to eligible entities 
to support pilot projects that design, implement, and evaluate inno- 
vative models of regionalized, comprehensive, and accountable 
emergency care and trauma systems. 

"(b) Eligible Entity; Region. — In this section: 

"(1) Eligible entity. — The term 'eligible entity' means — 

"(A) a State or a partnership of 1 or more States and 
1 or more local governments; or 

June 9, 2010 



441 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3504U204 PHSA 



"(B) an Indian tribe (as defined in section 4 of the In- 
dian Health Care Improvement Act) or a partnership of 1 
or more Indian tribes. 

"(2) Region. — The term 'region' means an area within a 
State, an area that lies within multiple States, or a similar 
area (such as a multicounty area), as determined by the Sec- 
retary. 

"(3) Emergency services. — The term 'emergency services' 
includes acute, prehospital, and trauma care. 
"(c) Pilot Projects. — The Secretary shall award a contract or 
grant under subsection (a) to an eligible entity that proposes a pilot 
project to design, implement, and evaluate an emergency medical 
and trauma system that — 

"(1) coordinates with public health and safety services, 
emergency medical services, medical facilities, trauma centers, 
and other entities in a region to develop an approach to emer- 
gency medical and trauma system access throughout the re- 
gion, including 9-1-1 Public Safety Answering Points and 
emergency medical dispatch; 

"(2) includes a mechanism, such as a regional medical di- 
rection or transport communications system, that operates 
throughout the region to ensure that the patient is taken to 
the medically appropriate facility (whether an initial facility or 
a higher-level facility) in a timely fashion; 

"(3) allows for the tracking of prehospital and hospital re- 
sources, including inpatient bed capacity, emergency depart- 
ment capacity, trauma center capacity, on-call specialist cov- 
erage, ambulance diversion status, and the coordination of 
such tracking with regional communications and hospital des- 
tination decisions; and 

"(4) includes a consistent region-wide prehospital, hospital, 
and interfacility data management system that — 

"(A) submits data to the National EMS Information 
System, the National Trauma Data Bank, and others; 

"(B) reports data to appropriate Federal and State 
databanks and registries; and 

"(C) contains information sufficient to evaluate key 
elements of prehospital care, hospital destination deci- 
sions, including initial hospital and interfacility decisions, 
and relevant health outcomes of hospital care. 
"(d) Application. — 

"(1) In general. — An eligible entity that seeks a contract 
or grant described in subsection (a) shall submit to the Sec- 
retary an application at such time and in such manner as the 
Secretary may require. 

"(2) Application information. — Each application shall in- 
clude — 

"(A) an assurance from the eligible entity that the pro- 
posed system — 

"(i) has been coordinated with the applicable State 
Office of Emergency Medical Services (or equivalent 
State office); 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3504U204 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



442 



"(ii) includes consistent indirect and direct medical 
oversight of prehospital, hospital, and interfacility 
transport throughout the region; 

"(hi) coordinates prehospital treatment and triage, 
hospital destination, and interfacility transport 
throughout the region; 

"(iv) includes a categorization or designation sys- 
tem for special medical facilities throughout the region 
that is integrated with transport and destination pro- 
tocols; 

"(v) includes a regional medical direction, patient 
tracking, and resource allocation system that supports 
day-to-day emergency care and surge capacity and is 
integrated with other components of the national and 
State emergency preparedness system; and 

"(vi) addresses pediatric concerns related to inte- 
gration, planning, preparedness, and coordination of 
emergency medical services for infants, children and 
adolescents; and 

"(B) such other information as the Secretary may re- 
quire. 

"(e) Requirement of Matching Funds. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary may not make a grant 
under this section unless the State (or consortia of States) in- 
volved agrees, with respect to the costs to be incurred by the 
State (or consortia) in carrying out the purpose for which such 
grant was made, to make available non-Federal contributions 
(in cash or in kind under paragraph (2)) toward such costs in 
an amount equal to not less than $1 for each $3 of Federal 
funds provided in the grant. Such contributions may be made 
directly or through donations from public or private entities. 

"(2) Non-federal contributions. — Non-Federal contribu- 
tions required in paragraph (1) may be in cash or in kind, fair- 
ly evaluated, including equipment or services (and excluding 
indirect or overhead costs). Amounts provided by the Federal 
Government, or services assisted or subsidized to any signifi- 
cant extent by the Federal Government, may not be included 
in determining the amount of such non-Federal contributions. 
"(f) Priority. — The Secretary shall give priority for the award 
of the contracts or grants described in subsection (a) to any eligible 
entity that serves a population in a medically underserved area (as 
defined in section 330(b)(3)). 

"(g) Report. — Not later than 90 days after the completion of 
a pilot project under subsection (a), the recipient of such contract 
or grant described in shall submit to the Secretary a report con- 
taining the results of an evaluation of the program, including an 
identification of — 

"(1) the impact of the regional, accountable emergency care 
and trauma system on patient health outcomes for various crit- 
ical care categories, such as trauma, stroke, cardiac emer- 
gencies, neurological emergencies, and pediatric emergencies; 

"(2) the system characteristics that contribute to the effec- 
tiveness and efficiency of the program (or lack thereof); 

June 9, 2010 



443 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 3504\498D PHSA 



"(3) methods of assuring the long-term financial sustain- 
ability of the emergency care and trauma system; 

"(4) the State and local legislation necessary to implement 
and to maintain the system; 

"(5) the barriers to developing regionalized, accountable 
emergency care and trauma systems, as well as the methods 
to overcome such barriers; and 

"(6) recommendations on the utilization of available fund- 
ing for future regionalization efforts. 

"(h) Dissemination of Findings. — The Secretary shall, as ap- 
propriate, disseminate to the public and to the appropriate Com- 
mittees of the Congress, the information contained in a report 
made under subsection (g)."; and 
(3) in section 1232— 

(A) in subsection (a), by striking "appropriated" and 
all that follows through the period at the end and inserting 
"appropriated $24,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2010 
through 2014."; and 

(B) by inserting after subsection (c) the following: 

"(d) Authority. — For the purpose of carrying out parts A 
through C, beginning on the date of enactment of the Patient Pro- 
tection and Affordable Care Act, the Secretary shall transfer au- 
thority in administering grants and related authorities under such 
parts from the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
Administration to the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Re- 
sponse.". 

(b) Support for Emergency Medicine Research. — Part H of 
title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 289 et seq.) is 
amended by inserting after the section 498C the following: 

"SEC. 498D [42 U.S.C. 289g-4]. SUPPORT FOR EMERGENCY MEDICINE 
RESEARCH. 

"(a) Emergency Medical Research. — The Secretary shall 
support Federal programs administered by the National Institutes 
of Health, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, the 
Health Resources and Services Administration, the Centers for Dis- 
ease Control and Prevention, and other agencies involved in im- 
proving the emergency care system to expand and accelerate re- 
search in emergency medical care systems and emergency medi- 
cine, including — 

"(1) the basic science of emergency medicine; 
"(2) the model of service delivery and the components of 
such models that contribute to enhanced patient health out- 
comes; 

"(3) the translation of basic scientific research into im- 
proved practice; and 

"(4) the development of timely and efficient delivery of 
health services. 

"(b) Pediatric Emergency Medical Research. — The Sec- 
retary shall support Federal programs administered by the Na- 
tional Institutes of Health, the Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality, the Health Resources and Services Administration, the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and other agencies to 
coordinate and expand research in pediatric emergency medical 
care systems and pediatric emergency medicine, including — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3505 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



444 



"(1) an examination of the gaps and opportunities in pedi- 
atric emergency care research and a strategy for the optimal 
organization and funding of such research; 

"(2) the role of pediatric emergency services as an inte- 
grated component of the overall health system; 

"(3) system-wide pediatric emergency care planning, pre- 
paredness, coordination, and funding; 

"(4) pediatric training in professional education; and 

"(5) research in pediatric emergency care, specifically on 
the efficacy, safety, and health outcomes of medications used 
for infants, children, and adolescents in emergency care set- 
tings in order to improve patient safety. 

"(c) Impact Research. — The Secretary shall support research 
to determine the estimated economic impact of, and savings that 
result from, the implementation of coordinated emergency care sys- 
tems. 

"(d) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are author- 
ized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may 
be necessary for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014.". 

SEC. 3505. TRAUMA CARE CENTERS AND SERVICE AVAILABILITY. 

(a) Trauma Care Centers. — 

(1) Grants for trauma care centers. — Section 1241 of 
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300d-41) is amended 
by striking subsections (a) and (b) and inserting the following: 
"(a) In General. — The Secretary shall establish 3 programs to 
award grants to qualified public, nonprofit Indian Health Service, 
Indian tribal, and urban Indian trauma centers — 

"(1) to assist in defraying substantial uncompensated care 
costs; 

"(2) to further the core missions of such trauma centers, 
including by addressing costs associated with patient stabiliza- 
tion and transfer, trauma education and outreach, coordination 
with local and regional trauma systems, essential personnel 
and other fixed costs, and expenses associated with employee 
and non-employee physician services; and 

"(3) to provide emergency relief to ensure the continued 
and future availability of trauma services. 
"(b) Minimum Qualifications of Trauma Centers. — 

"(1) Participation in trauma care system operating 
under certain professional guidelines. — Except as pro- 
vided in paragraph (2), the Secretary may not award a grant 
to a trauma center under subsection (a) unless the trauma cen- 
ter is a participant in a trauma system that substantially com- 
plies with section 1213. 

"(2) Exemption. — Paragraph (1) shall not apply to trauma 
centers that are located in States with no existing trauma care 
system. 

"(3) Qualification for substantial uncompensated 
care costs. — The Secretary shall award substantial uncom- 
pensated care grants under subsection (a)(1) only to trauma 
centers meeting at least 1 of the criteria in 1 of the following 
3 categories: 

June 9, 2010 



445 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3505 



"(A) Category a. — The criteria for category A are as 
follows: 

"(i) At least 40 percent of the visits in the emer- 
gency department of the hospital in which the trauma 
center is located were charity or self-pay patients. 

"(ii) At least 50 percent of the visits in such emer- 
gency department were Medicaid (under title XIX of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.)) and 
charity and self-pay patients combined. 
"(B) Category b. — The criteria for category B are as 
follows: 

"(i) At least 35 percent of the visits in the emer- 
gency department were charity or self-pay patients. 

"(ii) At least 50 percent of the visits in the emer- 
gency department were Medicaid and charity and self- 
pay patients combined. 

"(C) Category c. — The criteria for category C are as 
follows: 

"(i) At least 20 percent of the visits in the emer- 
gency department were charity or self-pay patients. 

"(ii) At least 30 percent of the visits in the emer- 
gency department were Medicaid and charity and self- 
pay patients combined. 
"(4) Trauma centers in 1115 waiver states. — Notwith- 
standing paragraph (3), the Secretary may award a substantial 
uncompensated care grant to a trauma center under subsection 
(a)(1) if the trauma center qualifies for funds under a Low In- 
come Pool or Safety Net Care Pool established through a waiv- 
er approved under section 1115 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1315). 

"(5) Designation. — The Secretary may not award a grant 
to a trauma center unless such trauma center is verified by the 
American College of Surgeons or designated by an equivalent 
State or local agency. 

"(c) Additional Requirements. — The Secretary may not 
award a grant to a trauma center under subsection (a)(1) unless 
such trauma center — 

"(1) submits to the Secretary a plan satisfactory to the Sec- 
retary that demonstrates a continued commitment to serving 
trauma patients regardless of their ability to pay; and 

"(2) has policies in place to assist patients who cannot pay 
for part or all of the care they receive, including a sliding fee 
scale, and to ensure fair billing and collection practices.". 

(2) Considerations in making grants. — Section 1242 of 
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300d-42) is amended 
by striking subsections (a) and (b) and inserting the following: 
"(a) Substantial Uncompensated Care Awards. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall establish an award 
basis for each eligible trauma center for grants under section 
1241(a)(1) according to the percentage described in paragraph 
(2), subject to the requirements of section 1241(b)(3). 

"(2) Percentages. — The applicable percentages are as fol- 
lows: 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3505 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



446 



"(A) With respect to a category A trauma center, 100 
percent of the uncompensated care costs. 

"(B) With respect to a category B trauma center, not 
more than 75 percent of the uncompensated care costs. 

"(C) With respect to a category C trauma center, not 
more than 50 percent of the uncompensated care costs. 
"(b) Core Mission Awards. — 

"(1) In general. — In awarding grants under section 
1241(a)(2), the Secretary shall— 

"(A) reserve 25 percent of the amount allocated for 
core mission awards for Level III and Level IV trauma 
centers; and 

"(B) reserve 25 percent of the amount allocated for 
core mission awards for large urban Level I and II trauma 
centers — 

"(i) that have at least 1 graduate medical edu- 
cation fellowship in trauma or trauma related special- 
ties for which demand is exceeding supply; 
"(ii) for which — 

"(I) annual uncompensated care costs exceed 
$10,000,000; or 

"(II) at least 20 percent of emergency depart- 
ment visits are charity or self-pay or Medicaid pa- 
tients; and 

"(hi) that are not eligible for substantial uncom- 
pensated care awards under section 1241(a)(1). 
"(c) Emergency Awards. — In awarding grants under section 
1241(a)(3), the Secretary shall— 

"(1) give preference to any application submitted by a trau- 
ma center that provides trauma care in a geographic area in 
which the availability of trauma care has significantly de- 
creased or will significantly decrease if the center is forced to 
close or downgrade service or growth in demand for trauma 
services exceeds capacity; and 

"(2) reallocate any emergency awards funds not obligated 
due to insufficient, or a lack of qualified, applications to the 
significant uncompensated care award program.". 

(3) Certain agreements. — Section 1243 of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300d-43) is amended by striking 
subsections (a), (b), and (c) and inserting the following: 

"(a) Maintenance of Financial Support. — The Secretary 
may require a trauma center receiving a grant under section 
1241(a) to maintain access to trauma services at comparable levels 
to the prior year during the grant period. 

"(b) Trauma Care Registry. — The Secretary may require the 
trauma center receiving a grant under section 1241(a) to provide 
data to a national and centralized registry of trauma cases, in ac- 
cordance with guidelines developed by the American College of Sur- 
geons, and as the Secretary may otherwise require.". 

(4) General provisions.— Section 1244 of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300d-44) is amended by striking 
subsections (a), (b), and (c) and inserting the following: 

"(a) Application. — The Secretary may not award a grant to a 
trauma center under section 1241(a) unless such center submits an 

June 9, 2010 



447 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3505M245 PHSA 



application for the grant to the Secretary and the application is in 
such form, is made in such manner, and contains such agreements, 
assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be nec- 
essary to carry out this part. 

"(b) Limitation on Duration of Support. — The period during 
which a trauma center receives payments under a grant under sec- 
tion 1241(a)(3) shall be for 3 fiscal years, except that the Secretary 
may waive such requirement for a center and authorize such center 
to receive such payments for 1 additional fiscal year. 

"(c) Limitation on Amount of Grant. — Notwithstanding sec- 
tion 1242(a), a grant under section 1241 may not be made in an 
amount exceeding $2,000,000 for each fiscal year. 

"(d) Eligibility. — Except as provided in section 
1242(b)(l)(B)(iii), acquisition of, or eligibility for, a grant under sec- 
tion 1241(a) shall not preclude a trauma center from being eligible 
for other grants described in such section. 

"(e) Funding Distribution. — Of the total amount appropriated 
for a fiscal year under section 1245, 70 percent shall be used for 
substantial uncompensated care awards under section 1241(a)(1), 
20 percent shall be used for core mission awards under section 
1241(a)(2), and 10 percent shall be used for emergency awards 
under section 1241(a)(3). 

"(f) Minimum Allowance. — Notwithstanding subsection (e), if 
the amount appropriated for a fiscal year under section 1245 is less 
than $25,000,000, all available funding for such fiscal year shall be 
used for substantial uncompensated care awards under section 
1241(a)(1). 

"(g) Substantial Uncompensated Care Award Distribution 
and Proportional Share. — Notwithstanding section 1242(a), of 
the amount appropriated for substantial uncompensated care 
grants for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall — 
"(1) make available — 

"(A) 50 percent of such funds for category A trauma 
center grantees; 

"(B) 35 percent of such funds for category B trauma 
center grantees; and 

"(C) 15 percent of such funds for category C trauma 
center grantees; and 

"(2) provide available funds within each category in a man- 
ner proportional to the award basis specified in section 
1242(a)(2) to each eligible trauma center. 

"(h) Report. — Beginning 2 years after the date of enactment of 
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, and every 2 years 
thereafter, the Secretary shall biennially report to Congress regard- 
ing the status of the grants made under section 1241 and on the 
overall financial stability of trauma centers.". 

(5) Authorization of appropriations. — Section 1245 of 

the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300d-45) is amended 

to read as follows: 

"SEC. 1245. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS. 

"For the purpose of carrying out this part, there are authorized 
to be appropriated $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2009, and such 
sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2010 through 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3505 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



448 



2015. Such authorization of appropriations is in addition to any 
other authorization of appropriations or amounts that are available 
for such purpose.". 

(6) Definition.— Part D of title XII of the Public Health 

Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300d-41 et seq.) is amended by adding 

at the end the following: 

"SEC. 1246 [42 U.S.C. 300d-46] . DEFINITION. 

"In this part, the term 'uncompensated care costs' means unre- 
imbursed costs from serving self-pay, charity, or Medicaid patients, 
without regard to payment under section 1923 of the Social Secu- 
rity Act, all of which are attributable to emergency care and trau- 
ma care, including costs related to subsequent inpatient admissions 
to the hospital.". 

(b) Trauma Service Availability. — Title XII of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300d et seq.) is amended by adding 
at the end the following: 

"PART H— TRAUMA SERVICE AVAILABILITY 

"SEC. 1281 [42 U.S.C. 300d-81]. GRANTS TO STATES. 

"(a) Establishment. — To promote universal access to trauma 
care services provided by trauma centers and trauma-related physi- 
cian specialties, the Secretary shall provide funding to States to en- 
able such States to award grants to eligible entities for the pur- 
poses described in this section. 

"(b) Awarding of Grants by States. — Each State may award 
grants to eligible entities within the State for the purposes de- 
scribed in subparagraph (d). 

"(c) Eligibility. — 

"(1) In general. — To be eligible to receive a grant under 

subsection (b) an entity shall — 
"(A) be— 

"(i) a public or nonprofit trauma center or consor- 
tium thereof that meets that requirements of para- 
graphs (1), (2), and (5) of section 1241(b); 

"(ii) a safety net public or nonprofit trauma center 
that meets the requirements of paragraphs (1) through 
(5) of section 1241(b); or 

"(hi) a hospital in an underserved area (as defined 
by the State) that seeks to establish new trauma serv- 
ices; and 

"(B) submit to the State an application at such time, 
in such manner, and containing such information as the 
State may require. 

"(2) Limitation. — A State shall use at least 40 percent of 
the amount available to the State under this part for a fiscal 
year to award grants to safety net trauma centers described in 
paragraph (l)(A)(ii). 

"(d) Use of Funds. — The recipient of a grant under subsection 
(b) shall carry out 1 or more of the following activities consistent 
with subsection (b): 

"(1) Providing trauma centers with funding to support phy- 
sician compensation in trauma-related physician specialties 

June 9, 2010 



449 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3505X1281 PHSA 



where shortages exist in the region involved, with priority pro- 
vided to safety net trauma centers described in subsection 
(cXIXAXii). 

"(2) Providing for individual safety net trauma center fis- 
cal stability and costs related to having service that is avail- 
able 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, with priority provided to 
safety net trauma centers described in subsection (c)(l)(A)(ii) 
located in urban, border, and rural areas. 

"(3) Reducing trauma center overcrowding at specific trau- 
ma centers related to throughput of trauma patients. 

"(4) Establishing new trauma services in underserved 
areas as defined by the State. 

"(5) Enhancing collaboration between trauma centers and 
other hospitals and emergency medical services personnel re- 
lated to trauma service availability. 

"(6) Making capital improvements to enhance access and 
expedite trauma care, including providing helipads and associ- 
ated safety infrastructure. 

"(7) Enhancing trauma surge capacity at specific trauma 
centers. 

"(8) Ensuring expedient receipt of trauma patients trans- 
ported by ground or air to the appropriate trauma center. 

"(9) Enhancing interstate trauma center collaboration. 
"(e) Limitation. — 

"(1) In general. — A State may use not more than 20 per- 
cent of the amount available to the State under this part for 
a fiscal year for administrative costs associated with awarding 
grants and related costs. 

"(2) Maintenance of effort. — The Secretary may not 
provide funding to a State under this part unless the State 
agrees that such funds will be used to supplement and not sup- 
plant State funding otherwise available for the activities and 
costs described in this part. 

"(f) Distribution of Funds. — The following shall apply with 
respect to grants provided in this part: 

"(1) Less than $10,000,000. — If the amount of appropria- 
tions for this part in a fiscal year is less than $10,000,000, the 
Secretary shall divide such funding evenly among only those 
States that have 1 or more trauma centers eligible for funding 
under section 1241(b)(3)(A). 

"(2) Less than $20,000,000. — If the amount of appropria- 
tions in a fiscal year is less than $20,000,000, the Secretary 
shall divide such funding evenly among only those States that 
have 1 or more trauma centers eligible for funding under sub- 
paragraphs (A) and (B) of section 1241(b)(3). 

"(3) Less than $30,000,000. — If the amount of appropria- 
tions for this part in a fiscal year is less than $30,000,000, the 
Secretary shall divide such funding evenly among only those 
States that have 1 or more trauma centers eligible for funding 
under section 1241(b)(3). 

"(4) $30,000,000 OR more.— If the amount of appropria- 
tions for this part in a fiscal year is $30,000,000 or more, the 
Secretary shall divide such funding evenly among all States. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3506 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



450 



"SEC. 1282 [42 U.S.C. 300d-82]. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS. 

"For the purpose of carrying out this part, there is authorized 
to be appropriated $100,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2010 
through 2015.". 

SEC. 3506. PROGRAM TO FACILITATE SHARED DECISIONMAKING. 

Part D of title IX of the Public Health Service Act, as amended 
by section 3503, is further amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing: 

"SEC. 936 [42 U.S.C. 299b-36]. PROGRAM TO FACILITATE SHARED DECI- 
SIONMAKING. 

"(a) Purpose. — The purpose of this section is to facilitate col- 
laborative processes between patients, caregivers or authorized rep- 
resentatives, and clinicians that engages the patient, caregiver or 
authorized representative in decisionmaking, provides patients, 
caregivers or authorized representatives with information about 
trade-offs among treatment options, and facilitates the incorpora- 
tion of patient preferences and values into the medical plan. 
"(b) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(1) Patient decision aid. — The term 'patient decision aid' 
means an educational tool that helps patients, caregivers or 
authorized representatives understand and communicate their 
beliefs and preferences related to their treatment options, and 
to decide with their health care provider what treatments are 
best for them based on their treatment options, scientific evi- 
dence, circumstances, beliefs, and preferences. 

"(2) Preference sensitive care. — The term 'preference 
sensitive care' means medical care for which the clinical evi- 
dence does not clearly support one treatment option such that 
the appropriate course of treatment depends on the values of 
the patient or the preferences of the patient, caregivers or au- 
thorized representatives regarding the benefits, harms and sci- 
entific evidence for each treatment option, the use of such care 
should depend on the informed patient choice among clinically 
appropriate treatment options. 

"(c) Establishment of Independent Standards for Patient 
Decision Aids for Preference Sensitive Care. — 

"(1) Contract with entity to establish standards and 

certify patient decision aids. — 

"(A) In general. — For purposes of supporting con- 
sensus-based standards for patient decision aids for pref- 
erence sensitive care and a certification process for patient 
decision aids for use in the Federal health programs and 
by other interested parties, the Secretary shall have in ef- 
fect a contract with the entity with a contract under sec- 
tion 1890 of the Social Security Act. Such contract shall 
provide that the entity perform the duties described in 
paragraph (2). 

"(B) Timing for first contract. — As soon as prac- 
ticable after the date of the enactment of this section, the 
Secretary shall enter into the first contract under subpara- 
graph (A). 

"(C) Period of contract. — A contract under subpara- 
graph (A) shall be for a period of 18 months (except such 

June 9, 2010 



451 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3506\936 PHSA 



contract may be renewed after a subsequent bidding proc- 
ess). 

"(2) Duties. — The following duties are described in this 
paragraph: 

"(A) Develop and identify standards for patient 
decision aids. — The entity shall synthesize evidence and 
convene a broad range of experts and key stakeholders to 
develop and identify consensus-based standards to evalu- 
ate patient decision aids for preference sensitive care. 

"(B) Endorse patient decision aids. — The entity 
shall review patient decision aids and develop a certifi- 
cation process whether patient decision aids meet the 
standards developed and identified under subparagraph 
(A). The entity shall give priority to the review and certifi- 
cation of patient decision aids for preference sensitive care. 
"(d) Program To Develop, Update and Patient Decision 
Aids To Assist Health Care Providers and Patients. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary, acting through the Direc- 
tor, and in coordination with heads of other relevant agencies, 
such as the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention and the Director of the National Institutes of 
Health, shall establish a program to award grants or con- 
tracts — 

"(A) to develop, update, and produce patient decision 
aids for preference sensitive care to assist health care pro- 
viders in educating patients, caregivers, and authorized 
representatives concerning the relative safety, relative ef- 
fectiveness (including possible health outcomes and impact 
on functional status), and relative cost of treatment or, 
where appropriate, palliative care options; 

"(B) to test such materials to ensure such materials 
are balanced and evidence based in aiding health care pro- 
viders and patients, caregivers, and authorized representa- 
tives to make informed decisions about patient care and 
can be easily incorporated into a broad array of practice 
settings; and 

"(C) to educate providers on the use of such materials, 
including through academic curricula. 
"(2) Requirements for patient decision aids. — Patient 
decision aids developed and produced pursuant to a grant or 
contract under paragraph (1) — 

"(A) shall be designed to engage patients, caregivers, 
and authorized representatives in informed decision- 
making with health care providers; 

"(B) shall present up-to-date clinical evidence about 
the risks and benefits of treatment options in a form and 
manner that is age-appropriate and can be adapted for pa- 
tients, caregivers, and authorized representatives from a 
variety of cultural and educational backgrounds to reflect 
the varying needs of consumers and diverse levels of 
health literacy; 

"(C) shall, where appropriate, explain why there is a 
lack of evidence to support one treatment option over an- 
other; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3506\936 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



452 



"(D) shall address health care decisions across the age 
span, including those affecting vulnerable populations in- 
cluding children. 

"(3) Distribution. — The Director shall ensure that patient 
decision aids produced with grants or contracts under this sec- 
tion are available to the public. 

"(4) Nonduplication OF efforts. — The Director shall en- 
sure that the activities under this section of the Agency and 
other agencies, including the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention and the National Institutes of Health, are free of 
unnecessary duplication of effort. 

"(e) Grants To Support Shared Decisionmaking Implemen- 
tation. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall establish a program 
to provide for the phased-in development, implementation, and 
evaluation of shared decisionmaking using patient decision 
aids to meet the objective of improving the understanding of 
patients of their medical treatment options. 

"(2) Shared decisionmaking resource centers. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall provide grants 
for the establishment and support of Shared Decision- 
making Resource Centers (referred to in this subsection as 
'Centers') to provide technical assistance to providers and 
to develop and disseminate best practices and other infor- 
mation to support and accelerate adoption, implementa- 
tion, and effective use of patient decision aids and shared 
decisionmaking by providers. 

"(B) Objectives. — The objective of a Center is to en- 
hance and promote the adoption of patient decision aids 
and shared decisionmaking through — 

"(i) providing assistance to eligible providers with 
the implementation and effective use of, and training 
on, patient decision aids; and 

"(ii) the dissemination of best practices and re- 
search on the implementation and effective use of pa- 
tient decision aids. 
"(3) Shared decisionmaking participation grants. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall provide grants 
to health care providers for the development and imple- 
mentation of shared decisionmaking techniques and to as- 
sess the use of such techniques. 

"(B) Preference. — In order to facilitate the use of 
best practices, the Secretary shall provide a preference in 
making grants under this subsection to health care pro- 
viders who participate in training by Shared Decision- 
making Resource Centers or comparable training. 

"(C) Limitation. — Funds under this paragraph shall 
not be used to purchase or implement use of patient deci- 
sion aids other than those certified under the process iden- 
tified in subsection (c). 

"(4) Guidance. — The Secretary may issue guidance to eli- 
gible grantees under this subsection on the use of patient deci- 
sion aids. 

June 9, 2010 



453 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3508 



"(f) Funding. — For purposes of carrying out this section there 
are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for fiscal year 2010 and each subsequent fiscal year.". 

SEC. 3507 [21 U.S.C. 352 note]. PRESENTATION OF PRESCRIPTION 
DRUG BENEFIT AND RISK INFORMATION. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices (referred to in this section as the "Secretary"), acting through 
the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, shall determine whether the 
addition of quantitative summaries of the benefits and risks of pre- 
scription drugs in a standardized format (such as a table or drug 
facts box) to the promotional labeling or print advertising of such 
drugs would improve health care decisionmaking by clinicians and 
patients and consumers. 

(b) Review and Consultation. — In making the determination 
under subsection (a), the Secretary shall review all available sci- 
entific evidence and research on decisionmaking and social and cog- 
nitive psychology and consult with drug manufacturers, clinicians, 
patients and consumers, experts in health literacy, representatives 
of racial and ethnic minorities, and experts in women's and pedi- 
atric health. 

(c) Report. — Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report that 
provides — 

(1) the determination by the Secretary under subsection 
(a); and 

(2) the reasoning and analysis underlying that determina- 
tion. 

(d) Authority. — If the Secretary determines under subsection 
(a) that the addition of quantitative summaries of the benefits and 
risks of prescription drugs in a standardized format (such as a 
table or drug facts box) to the promotional labeling or print adver- 
tising of such drugs would improve health care decisionmaking by 
clinicians and patients and consumers, then the Secretary, not 
later than 3 years after the date of submission of the report under 
subsection (c), shall promulgate proposed regulations as necessary 
to implement such format. 

(e) Clarification. — Nothing in this section shall be construed 
to restrict the existing authorities of the Secretary with respect to 
benefit and risk information. 

SEC. 3508 [42 U.S.C. 294j note]. DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM TO INTE- 
GRATE QUALITY IMPROVEMENT AND PATIENT SAFETY 
TRAINING INTO CLINICAL EDUCATION OF HEALTH PRO- 
FESSIONALS. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary may award grants to eligible 
entities or consortia under this section to carry out demonstration 
projects to develop and implement academic curricula that inte- 
grates quality improvement and patient safety in the clinical edu- 
cation of health professionals. Such awards shall be made on a 
competitive basis and pursuant to peer review. 

(b) Eligibility. — To be eligible to receive a grant under sub- 
section (a), an entity or consortium shall — 

(1) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in 
such manner, and containing such information as the Sec- 
retary may require; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3509 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



454 



(2) be or include — 

(A) a health professions school; 

(B) a school of public health; 

(C) a school of social work; 

(D) a school of nursing; 

(E) a school of pharmacy; 

(F) an institution with a graduate medical education 
program; or 

(G) a school of health care administration; 

(3) collaborate in the development of curricula described in 
subsection (a) with an organization that accredits such school 
or institution; 

(4) provide for the collection of data regarding the effec- 
tiveness of the demonstration project; and 

(5) provide matching funds in accordance with subsection 

(c). 

(c) Matching Funds. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary may award a grant to an 
entity or consortium under this section only if the entity or 
consortium agrees to make available non-Federal contributions 
toward the costs of the program to be funded under the grant 
in an amount that is not less than $1 for each $5 of Federal 
funds provided under the grant. 

(2) Determination of amount contributed. — Non-Fed- 
eral contributions under paragraph (1) may be in cash or in- 
kind, fairly evaluated, including equipment or services. 
Amounts provided by the Federal Government, or services as- 
sisted or subsidized to any significant extent by the Federal 
Government, may not be included in determining the amount 
of such contributions. 

(d) Evaluation. — The Secretary shall take such action as may 
be necessary to evaluate the projects funded under this section and 
publish, make publicly available, and disseminate the results of 
such evaluations on as wide a basis as is practicable. 

(e) Reports. — Not later than 2 years after the date of enact- 
ment of this section, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall 
submit to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pen- 
sions and the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the Com- 
mittee on Energy and Commerce and the Committee on Ways and 
Means of the House of Representatives a report that — 

(1) describes the specific projects supported under this sec- 
tion; and 

(2) contains recommendations for Congress based on the 
evaluation conducted under subsection (d). 

SEC. 3509. IMPROVING WOMEN'S HEALTH. 

(a) Health and Human Services Office on Women's 
Health. — 

(1) Establishment. — Part A of title II of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 202 et seq.) is amended by adding at the 
end the following: 

June 9, 2010 



455 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3509X229 PHSA 



"SEC. 229 [42 U.S.C. 237a]. HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES OFFICE ON 
WOMEN'S HEALTH. 

"(a) Establishment of Office. — There is established within 
the Office of the Secretary, an Office on Women's Health (referred 
to in this section as the 'Office'). The Office shall be headed by a 
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Women's Health who may report to 
the Secretary. 

"(b) Duties. — The Secretary, acting through the Office, with 
respect to the health concerns of women, shall — 

"(1) establish short-range and long-range goals and objec- 
tives within the Department of Health and Human Services 
and, as relevant and appropriate, coordinate with other appro- 
priate offices on activities within the Department that relate to 
disease prevention, health promotion, service delivery, re- 
search, and public and health care professional education, for 
issues of particular concern to women throughout their life- 
span; 

"(2) provide expert advice and consultation to the Sec- 
retary concerning scientific, legal, ethical, and policy issues re- 
lating to women's health; 

"(3) monitor the Department of Health and Human Serv- 
ices' offices, agencies, and regional activities regarding wom- 
en's health and identify needs regarding the coordination of ac- 
tivities, including intramural and extramural multidisciplinary 
activities; 

"(4) establish a Department of Health and Human Services 
Coordinating Committee on Women's Health, which shall be 
chaired by the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Women's Health 
and composed of senior level representatives from each of the 
agencies and offices of the Department of Health and Human 
Services; 

"(5) establish a National Women's Health Information Cen- 
ter to — 

"(A) facilitate the exchange of information regarding 
matters relating to health information, health promotion, 
preventive health services, research advances, and edu- 
cation in the appropriate use of health care; 
"(B) facilitate access to such information; 
"(C) assist in the analysis of issues and problems re- 
lating to the matters described in this paragraph; and 

"(D) provide technical assistance with respect to the 
exchange of information (including facilitating the develop- 
ment of materials for such technical assistance); 
"(6) coordinate efforts to promote women's health programs 
and policies with the private sector; and 

"(7) through publications and any other means appro- 
priate, provide for the exchange of information between the Of- 
fice and recipients of grants, contracts, and agreements under 
subsection (c), and between the Office and health professionals 
and the general public. 

"(c) Grants and Contracts Regarding Duties. — 

"(1) Authority. — In carrying out subsection (b), the Sec- 
retary may make grants to, and enter into cooperative agree- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3509 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



456 



ments, contracts, and interagency agreements with, public and 
private entities, agencies, and organizations. 

"(2) Evaluation and dissemination. — The Secretary shall 
directly or through contracts with public and private entities, 
agencies, and organizations, provide for evaluations of projects 
carried out with financial assistance provided under paragraph 
(1) and for the dissemination of information developed as a re- 
sult of such projects. 

"(d) Reports. — Not later than 1 year after the date of enact- 
ment of this section, and every second year thereafter, the Sec- 
retary shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of 
Congress a report describing the activities carried out under this 
section during the period for which the report is being prepared. 

"(e) Authorization of Appropriations. — For the purpose of 
carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated 
such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2010 
through 2014.". 

(2) Transfer of functions. — There are transferred to the 
Office on Women's Health (established under section 229 of the 
Public Health Service Act, as added by this section), all func- 
tions exercised by the Office on Women's Health of the Public 
Health Service prior to the date of enactment of this section, 
including all personnel and compensation authority, all delega- 
tion and assignment authority, and all remaining appropria- 
tions. All orders, determinations, rules, regulations, permits, 
agreements, grants, contracts, certificates, licenses, registra- 
tions, privileges, and other administrative actions that — 

(A) have been issued, made, granted, or allowed to be- 
come effective by the President, any Federal agency or offi- 
cial thereof, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, in the 
performance of functions transferred under this paragraph; 
and 

(B) are in effect at the time this section takes effect, 
or were final before the date of enactment of this section 
and are to become effective on or after such date, 

shall continue in effect according to their terms until modified, 
terminated, superseded, set aside, or revoked in accordance 
with law by the President, the Secretary, or other authorized 
official, a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of 
law. 

(b) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Office 
of Women's Health. — Part A of title III of the Public Health Serv- 
ice Act (42 U.S.C. 241 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following: 

"SEC. 310A [42 U.S.C. 242s]. CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND 
PREVENTION OFFICE OF WOMEN'S HEALTH. 

"(a) Establishment. — There is established within the Office of 
the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, an 
office to be known as the Office of Women's Health (referred to in 
this section as the 'Office'). The Office shall be headed by a director 
who shall be appointed by the Director of such Centers. 
"(b) Purpose. — The Director of the Office shall — 

"(1) report to the Director of the Centers for Disease Con- 
trol and Prevention on the current level of the Centers' activity 

June 9, 2010 



457 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3509 



regarding women's health conditions across, where appro- 
priate, age, biological, and sociocultural contexts, in all aspects 
of the Centers' work, including prevention programs, public 
and professional education, services, and treatment; 

"(2) establish short-range and long-range goals and objec- 
tives within the Centers for women's health and, as relevant 
and appropriate, coordinate with other appropriate offices on 
activities within the Centers that relate to prevention, re- 
search, education and training, service delivery, and policy de- 
velopment, for issues of particular concern to women; 

"(3) identify projects in women's health that should be con- 
ducted or supported by the Centers; 

"(4) consult with health professionals, nongovernmental or- 
ganizations, consumer organizations, women's health profes- 
sionals, and other individuals and groups, as appropriate, on 
the policy of the Centers with regard to women; and 

"(5) serve as a member of the Department of Health and 
Human Services Coordinating Committee on Women's Health 
(established under section 229(b)(4)). 

"(c) Definition. — As used in this section, the term 'women's 
health conditions', with respect to women of all age, ethnic, and ra- 
cial groups, means diseases, disorders, and conditions — 

"(1) unique to, significantly more serious for, or signifi- 
cantly more prevalent in women; and 

"(2) for which the factors of medical risk or type of medical 
intervention are different for women, or for which there is rea- 
sonable evidence that indicates that such factors or types may 
be different for women. 

"(d) Authorization of Appropriations. — For the purpose of 
carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated 
such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2010 
through 2014.". 

(c) Office of Women's Health Research. — Section 486(a) of 
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 287d(a)) is amended by in- 
serting "and who shall report directly to the Director" before the 
period at the end thereof. 

(d) Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Admin- 
istration. — Section 501(f) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 290aa(f)) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (1), by inserting "who shall report directly 
to the Administrator" before the period; 

(2) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (5); and 

(3) by inserting after paragraph (3), the following: 

"(4) Office. — Nothing in this subsection shall be construed 
to preclude the Secretary from establishing within the Sub- 
stance Abuse and Mental Health Administration an Office of 
Women's Health.". 

(e) Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality Activi- 
ties Regarding Women's Health. — Part C of title IX of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299c et seq.) is amended — 

(1) by redesignating sections 925 and 926 as sections 926 
and 927, respectively; and 

(2) by inserting after section 924 the following: 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3509X925 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



458 



"SEC. 925 [42 U.S.C. 299b-24a]. ACTIVITIES REGARDING WOMEN'S 
HEALTH. 

"(a) Establishment. — There is established within the Office of 
the Director, an Office of Women's Health and Gender-Based Re- 
search (referred to in this section as the 'Office'). The Office shall 
be headed by a director who shall be appointed by the Director of 
Healthcare and Research Quality. 

"(b) Purpose. — The official designated under subsection (a) 
shall— 

"(1) report to the Director on the current Agency level of 
activity regarding women's health, across, where appropriate, 
age, biological, and sociocultural contexts, in all aspects of 
Agency work, including the development of evidence reports 
and clinical practice protocols and the conduct of research into 
patient outcomes, delivery of health care services, quality of 
care, and access to health care; 

"(2) establish short-range and long-range goals and objec- 
tives within the Agency for research important to women's 
health and, as relevant and appropriate, coordinate with other 
appropriate offices on activities within the Agency that relate 
to health services and medical effectiveness research, for issues 
of particular concern to women; 

"(3) identify projects in women's health that should be con- 
ducted or supported by the Agency; 

"(4) consult with health professionals, nongovernmental or- 
ganizations, consumer organizations, women's health profes- 
sionals, and other individuals and groups, as appropriate, on 
Agency policy with regard to women; and 

"(5) serve as a member of the Department of Health and 
Human Services Coordinating Committee on Women's Health 
(established under section 229(b)(4)).". 

"(c) Authorization of Appropriations. — For the purpose of 
carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated 
such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2010 
through 2014.". 

(f) Health Resources and Services Administration Office 
of Women's Health. — Title VII of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 901 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"SEC. 713 [42 U.S.C. 914]. OFFICE OF WOMEN'S HEALTH. 

"(a) Establishment. — The Secretary shall establish within the 
Office of the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
Administration, an office to be known as the Office of Women's 
Health. The Office shall be headed by a director who shall be ap- 
pointed by the Administrator. 

"(b) Purpose. — The Director of the Office shall — 

"(1) report to the Administrator on the current Administra- 
tion level of activity regarding women's health across, where 
appropriate, age, biological, and sociocultural contexts; 

"(2) establish short-range and long-range goals and objec- 
tives within the Health Resources and Services Administration 
for women's health and, as relevant and appropriate, coordi- 
nate with other appropriate offices on activities within the Ad- 
ministration that relate to health care provider training, 

June 9, 2010 



459 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3509M011 FFDCA 



health service delivery, research, and demonstration projects, 
for issues of particular concern to women; 

"(3) identify projects in women's health that should be con- 
ducted or supported by the bureaus of the Administration; 

"(4) consult with health professionals, nongovernmental or- 
ganizations, consumer organizations, women's health profes- 
sionals, and other individuals and groups, as appropriate, on 
Administration policy with regard to women; and 

"(5) serve as a member of the Department of Health and 
Human Services Coordinating Committee on Women's Health 
(established under section 229(b)(4) of the Public Health Serv- 
ice Act). 

"(c) Continued Administration of Existing Programs. — The 
Director of the Office shall assume the authority for the develop- 
ment, implementation, administration, and evaluation of any 
projects carried out through the Health Resources and Services Ad- 
ministration relating to women's health on the date of enactment 
of this section. 

"(d) Definitions. — For purposes of this section: 

"(1) Administration. — The term Administration' means 
the Health Resources and Services Administration. 

"(2) Administrator. — The term 'Administrator' means the 
Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Adminis- 
tration. 

"(3) Office. — The term 'Office' means the Office of Wom- 
en's Health established under this section in the Administra- 
tion. 

"(e) Authorization of Appropriations. — For the purpose of 
carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated 
such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2010 
through 2014.". 

(g) Food and Drug Administration Office of Women's 
Health. — Chapter X of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 
(21 U.S.C. 391 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing: 

"SEC. 1011 [21 U.S.C. 399b]. OFFICE OF WOMEN'S HEALTH. 

"(a) Establishment. — There is established within the Office of 
the Commissioner, an office to be known as the Office of Women's 
Health (referred to in this section as the 'Office'). The Office shall 
be headed by a director who shall be appointed by the Commis- 
sioner of Food and Drugs. 

"(b) Purpose.— The Director of the Office shall— 

"(1) report to the Commissioner of Food and Drugs on cur- 
rent Food and Drug Administration (referred to in this section 
as the Administration') levels of activity regarding women's 
participation in clinical trials and the analysis of data by sex 
in the testing of drugs, medical devices, and biological products 
across, where appropriate, age, biological, and sociocultural 
contexts; 

"(2) establish short-range and long-range goals and objec- 
tives within the Administration for issues of particular concern 
to women's health within the jurisdiction of the Administra- 
tion, including, where relevant and appropriate, adequate in- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3509 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



460 



elusion of women and analysis of data by sex in Administration 
protocols and policies; 

"(3) provide information to women and health care pro- 
viders on those areas in which differences between men and 
women exist; 

"(4) consult with pharmaceutical, biologies, and device 
manufacturers, health professionals with expertise in women's 
issues, consumer organizations, and women's health profes- 
sionals on Administration policy with regard to women; 

"(5) make annual estimates of funds needed to monitor 
clinical trials and analysis of data by sex in accordance with 
needs that are identified; and 

"(6) serve as a member of the Department of Health and 
Human Services Coordinating Committee on Women's Health 
(established under section 229(b)(4) of the Public Health Serv- 
ice Act). 

"(c) Authorization of Appropriations. — For the purpose of 
carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated 
such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2010 
through 2014.". 

(h) No New Regulatory Authority. — Nothing in this section 
and the amendments made by this section may be construed as es- 
tablishing regulatory authority or modifying any existing regu- 
latory authority. 

(i) Limitation on Termination. — Notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, a Federal office of women's health (including the 
Office of Research on Women's Health of the National Institutes of 
Health) or Federal appointive position with primary responsibility 
over women's health issues (including the Associate Administrator 
for Women's Services under the Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration) that is in existence on the date of 
enactment of this section shall not be terminated, reorganized, or 
have any of it's powers or duties transferred unless such termi- 
nation, reorganization, or transfer is approved by Congress through 
the adoption of a concurrent resolution of approval. 

(j) Rule of Construction. — Nothing in this section (or the 
amendments made by this section) shall be construed to limit the 
authority of the Secretary of Health and Human Services with re- 
spect to women's health, or with respect to activities carried out 
through the Department of Health and Human Services on the 
date of enactment of this section. 

SEC. 3510. PATIENT NAVIGATOR PROGRAM. 

Section 340A of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256a) 
is amended — 

(1) by striking subsection (d)(3) and inserting the fol- 
lowing: 

"(3) Limitations on grant period. — In carrying out this 
section, the Secretary shall ensure that the total period of a 
grant does not exceed 4 years."; 

(2) in subsection (e), by adding at the end the following: 
"(3) Minimum core proficiencies. — The Secretary shall 

not award a grant to an entity under this section unless such 
entity provides assurances that patient navigators recruited, 

June 9, 2010 



461 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 3512 



assigned, trained, or employed using grant funds meet min- 
imum core proficiencies, as defined by the entity that submits 
the application, that are tailored for the main focus or inter- 
vention of the navigator involved."; and 
(3) in subsection (m) — 

(A) in paragraph (1), by striking "and $3,500,000 for 
fiscal year 2010." and inserting "$3,500,000 for fiscal year 
2010, and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal 
years 2011 through 2015."; and 

(B) in paragraph (2), by striking "2010" and inserting 
"2015". 

SEC. 3511. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS. 

Except where otherwise provided in this subtitle (or an amend- 
ment made by this subtitle), there is authorized to be appropriated 
such sums as may be necessary to carry out this subtitle (and such 
amendments made by this subtitle). 

SEC. 3512. GAO STUDY AND REPORT ON CAUSES OF ACTION. 

[Section added by section 10201(j)~\ 

(a) Study. — 

(1) In general. — The Comptroller General of the United 
States shall conduct a study of whether the development, rec- 
ognition, or implementation of any guideline or other stand- 
ards under a provision described in paragraph (2) would result 
in the establishment of a new cause of action or claim. 

(2) Provisions described. — The provisions described in 
this paragraph include the following: 

(A) Section 2701 (adult health quality measures). 

(B) Section 2702 (payment adjustments for health care 
acquired conditions). 

(C) Section 3001 (Hospital Value-Based Purchase Pro- 
gram). 

(D) Section 3002 (improvements to the Physician 
Quality Reporting Initiative). 

(E) Section 3003 (improvements to the Physician Feed- 
back Program). 

(F) Section 3007 (value based payment modifier under 
physician fee schedule). 

(G) Section 3008 (payment adjustment for conditions 
acquired in hospitals). 

(H) Section 3013 (quality measure development). 

(I) Section 3014 (quality measurement). 

(J) Section 3021 (Establishment of Center for Medi- 
care and Medicaid Innovation). 

(K) Section 3025 (hospital readmission reduction pro- 
gram). 

(L) Section 3501 (health care delivery system research, 
quality improvement). 

(M) Section 4003 (Task Force on Clinical and Preven- 
tive Services). 

(N) Section 4301 (research to optimize deliver of public 
health services). 

(b) Report. — Not later than 2 years after the date of enact- 
ment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 3601 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



462 



shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress, a report 
containing the findings made by the Comptroller General under the 
study under subsection (a). 

Subtitle G — Protecting and Improving 
Guaranteed Medicare Benefits 

SEC. 3601. PROTECTING AND IMPROVING GUARANTEED MEDICARE 
BENEFITS. 

(a) Protecting Guaranteed Medicare Benefits. — Nothing 
in the provisions of, or amendments made by, this Act shall result 
in a reduction of guaranteed benefits under title XVIII of the Social 
Security Act. 

(b) Ensuring That Medicare Savings Benefit the Medi- 
care Program and Medicare Beneficiaries. — Savings generated 
for the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security 
Act under the provisions of, and amendments made by, this Act 
shall extend the solvency of the Medicare trust funds, reduce Medi- 
care premiums and other cost-sharing for beneficiaries, and im- 
prove or expand guaranteed Medicare benefits and protect access 
to Medicare providers. 

SEC. 3602. NO CUTS IN GUARANTEED BENEFITS. 

Nothing in this Act shall result in the reduction or elimination 
of any benefits guaranteed by law to participants in Medicare Ad- 
vantage plans. 



463 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4001 



TITLE IV— PREVENTION OF CHRONIC 
DISEASE AND IMPROVING PUBLIC 
HEALTH 

Subtitle A — Modernizing Disease 
Prevention and Public Health Systems 

SEC. 4001 [42 U.S.C. 300u-10]. NATIONAL PREVENTION, HEALTH PRO- 
MOTION AND PUBLIC HEALTH COUNCIL. 

(a) Establishment. — The President shall establish, within the 
Department of Health and Human Services, a council to be known 
as the "National Prevention, Health Promotion and Public Health 
Council" (referred to in this section as the "Council"). 

(b) Chairperson. — The President shall appoint the Surgeon 
General to serve as the chairperson of the Council. 

(c) Composition. — The Council shall be composed of— 

(1) the Secretary of Health and Human Services; 

(2) the Secretary of Agriculture; 

(3) the Secretary of Education; 

(4) the Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission; 

(5) the Secretary of Transportation; 

(6) the Secretary of Labor; 

(7) the Secretary of Homeland Security; 

(8) the Administrator of the Environmental Protection 
Agency; 

(9) the Director of the Office of National Drug Control Pol- 
icy; 

(10) the Director of the Domestic Policy Council; 

(11) the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs; 

(12) the Chairman of the Corporation for National and 
Community Service; and 

(13) the head of any other Federal agency that the chair- 
person determines is appropriate. 

(d) Purposes and Duties. — The Council shall — 

(1) provide coordination and leadership at the Federal 
level, and among all Federal departments and agencies, with 
respect to prevention, wellness and health promotion practices, 
the public health system, and integrative health care in the 
United States; 

(2) after obtaining input from relevant stakeholders, de- 
velop a national prevention, health promotion, public health, 
and integrative health care strategy that incorporates the most 
effective and achievable means of improving the health status 
of Americans and reducing the incidence of preventable illness 
and disability in the United States; 

(3) provide recommendations to the President and Con- 
gress concerning the most pressing health issues confronting 
the United States and changes in Federal policy to achieve na- 
tional wellness, health promotion, and public health goals, in- 
cluding the reduction of tobacco use, sedentary behavior, and 
poor nutrition; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4001 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



464 



(4) consider and propose evidence-based models, policies, 
and innovative approaches for the promotion of transformative 
models of prevention, integrative health, and public health on 
individual and community levels across the United States; 

(5) establish processes for continual public input, including 
input from State, regional, and local leadership communities 
and other relevant stakeholders, including Indian tribes and 
tribal organizations; 

(6) submit the reports required under subsection (g); and 

(7) carry out other activities determined appropriate by the 
President. 

(e) Meetings. — The Council shall meet at the call of the Chair- 
person. 

(f) Advisory Group. — 

(1) In general. — The President shall establish an Advi- 
sory Group to the Council to be known as the "Advisory Group 
on Prevention, Health Promotion, and Integrative and Public 
Health" (hereafter referred to in this section as the "Advisory 
Group"). The Advisory Group shall be within the Department 
of Health and Human Services and report to the Surgeon Gen- 
eral. 

(2) Composition — 

(A) In general. — The Advisory Group shall be com- 
posed of not more than 25 non-Federal members to be ap- 
pointed by the President. 

(B) Representation. — In appointing members under 
subparagraph (A), the President shall ensure that the Ad- 
visory Group includes a diverse group of licensed health 
professionals, including integrative health practitioners 
who have expertise in — 

(i) worksite health promotion; 

(ii) community services, including community 
health centers; 

(iii) preventive medicine; 

(iv) health coaching; 

(v) public health education; 

(vi) geriatrics; and 

(vii) rehabilitation medicine. 

(3) Purposes and duties. — The Advisory Group shall de- 
velop policy and program recommendations and advise the 
Council on lifestyle-based chronic disease prevention and man- 
agement, integrative health care practices, and health pro- 
motion. 

(g) National Prevention and Health Promotion Strat- 
egy. — Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Chairperson, in consultation with the Council, shall develop 
and make public a national prevention, health promotion and pub- 
lic health strategy, and shall review and revise such strategy peri- 
odically. Such strategy shall — 

(1) set specific goals and objectives for improving the 
health of the United States through federally-supported pre- 
vention, health promotion, and public health programs, con- 
sistent with ongoing goal setting efforts conducted by specific 
agencies; 

June 9, 2010 



465 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4001 



(2) establish specific and measurable actions and timelines 
to carry out the strategy, and determine accountability for 
meeting those timelines, within and across Federal depart- 
ments and agencies; and 

(3) make recommendations to improve Federal efforts re- 
lating to prevention, health promotion, public health, and inte- 
grative health care practices to ensure Federal efforts are con- 
sistent with available standards and evidence. 

(h) Report. — Not later than July 1, 2010, and annually there- 
after through January 1, 2015, the Council shall submit to the 
President and the relevant committees of Congress, a report that — 

(1) describes the activities and efforts on prevention, 
health promotion, and public health and activities to develop 
a national strategy conducted by the Council during the period 
for which the report is prepared; 

(2) describes the national progress in meeting specific pre- 
vention, health promotion, and public health goals defined in 
the strategy and further describes corrective actions rec- 
ommended by the Council and taken by relevant agencies and 
organizations to meet these goals; 

(3) contains a list of national priorities on health pro- 
motion and disease prevention to address lifestyle behavior 
modification (smoking cessation, proper nutrition, appropriate 
exercise, mental health, behavioral health, substance use dis- 
order, and domestic violence screenings) and the prevention 
measures for the 5 leading disease killers in the United States; 

(4) contains specific science-based initiatives to achieve the 
measurable goals of Healthy People 2020 regarding nutrition, 
exercise, and smoking cessation, and targeting the 5 leading 
disease killers in the United States; [As revised by section 
10401(a)] 

(5) contains specific plans for consolidating Federal health 
programs and Centers that exist to promote healthy behavior 
and reduce disease risk (including eliminating programs and 
offices determined to be ineffective in meeting the priority 
goals of Healthy People 2020); [As revised by section 10401(a)~\ 

(6) contains specific plans to ensure that all Federal health 
care programs are fully coordinated with science-based preven- 
tion recommendations by the Director of the Centers for Dis- 
ease Control and Prevention; and 

(7) contains specific plans to ensure that all non-Depart- 
ment of Health and Human Services prevention programs are 
based on the science-based guidelines developed by the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention under paragraph (4). 

(i) Periodic Reviews. — The Secretary and the Comptroller 
General of the United States shall jointly conduct periodic reviews, 
not less than every 5 years, and evaluations of every Federal dis- 
ease prevention and health promotion initiative, program, and 
agency. Such reviews shall be evaluated based on effectiveness in 
meeting metrics-based goals with an analysis posted on such agen- 
cies' public Internet websites. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



466 



SEC. 4002 [42 U.S.C. 300u-ll]. PREVENTION AND PUBLIC HEALTH 
FUND. 

(a) Purpose. — It is the purpose of this section to establish a 
Prevention and Public Health Fund (referred to in this section as 
the "Fund"), to be administered through the Department of Health 
and Human Services, Office of the Secretary, to provide for ex- 
panded and sustained national investment in prevention and public 
health programs to improve health and help restrain the rate of 
growth in private and public sector health care costs. 

(b) Funding. — There are hereby authorized to be appropriated, 
and appropriated, to the Fund, out of any monies in the Treasury 
not otherwise appropriated — 

(1) for fiscal year 2010, $500,000,000; 

(2) for fiscal year 2011, $750,000,000; 

(3) for fiscal year 2012, $1,000,000,000; 

(4) for fiscal year 2013, $1,250,000,000; 

(5) for fiscal year 2014, $1,500,000,000; and 

(6) for fiscal year 2015, and each fiscal year thereafter, 
$2,000,000,000. 

(c) Use of Fund. — The Secretary shall transfer amounts in the 
Fund to accounts within the Department of Health and Human 
Services to increase funding, over the fiscal year 2008 level, for pro- 
grams authorized by the Public Health Service Act, for prevention, 
wellness, and public health activities including prevention re- 
search, health screenings, and initiatives, such as the Community 
Transformation grant program, the Education and Outreach Cam- 
paign Regarding Preventive Benefits, and immunization programs. 
[As revised by section 10401(bj\ 

(d) Transfer Authority. — The Committee on Appropriations 
of the Senate and the Committee on Appropriations of the House 
of Representatives may provide for the transfer of funds in the 
Fund to eligible activities under this section, subject to subsection 
(c). 

SEC. 4003. CLINICAL AND COMMUNITY PREVENTIVE SERVICES. 

(a) Preventive Services Task Force. — Section 915 of the 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299b-4) is amended by strik- 
ing subsection (a) and inserting the following: 
"(a) Preventive Services Task Force. — 

"(1) Establishment and purpose. — The Director shall 
convene an independent Preventive Services Task Force (re- 
ferred to in this subsection as the 'Task Force') to be composed 
of individuals with appropriate expertise. Such Task Force 
shall review the scientific evidence related to the effectiveness, 
appropriateness, and cost-effectiveness of clinical preventive 
services for the purpose of developing recommendations for the 
health care community, and updating previous clinical preven- 
tive recommendations, to be published in the Guide to Clinical 
Preventive Services (referred to in this section as the 'Guide'), 
for individuals and organizations delivering clinical services, 
including primary care professionals, health care systems, pro- 
fessional societies, employers, community organizations, non- 
profit organizations, Congress and other policy-makers, govern- 
mental public health agencies, health care quality organiza- 
tions, and organizations developing national health objectives. 

June 9, 2010 



467 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4003 



Such recommendations shall consider clinical preventive best 
practice recommendations from the Agency for Healthcare Re- 
search and Quality, the National Institutes of Health, the Cen- 
ters for Disease Control and Prevention, the Institute of Medi- 
cine, specialty medical associations, patient groups, and sci- 
entific societies. 

"(2) Duties. — The duties of the Task Force shall include — 
"(A) the development of additional topic areas for new 
recommendations and interventions related to those topic 
areas, including those related to specific sub-populations 
and age groups; 

"(B) at least once during every 5-year period, review 
interventions and update recommendations related to ex- 
isting topic areas, including new or improved techniques to 
assess the health effects of interventions; 

"(C) improved integration with Federal Government 
health objectives and related target setting for health im- 
provement; 

"(D) the enhanced dissemination of recommendations; 

"(E) the provision of technical assistance to those 
health care professionals, agencies and organizations that 
request help in implementing the Guide recommendations; 
and 

"(F) the submission of yearly reports to Congress and 
related agencies identifying gaps in research, such as pre- 
ventive services that receive an insufficient evidence state- 
ment, and recommending priority areas that deserve fur- 
ther examination, including areas related to populations 
and age groups not adequately addressed by current rec- 
ommendations. 

"(3) Role of agency. — The Agency shall provide ongoing 
administrative, research, and technical support for the oper- 
ations of the Task Force, including coordinating and sup- 
porting the dissemination of the recommendations of the Task 
Force, ensuring adequate staff resources, and assistance to 
those organizations requesting it for implementation of the 
Guide's recommendations. 

"(4) Coordination with community preventive services 
task force. — The Task Force shall take appropriate steps to 
coordinate its work with the Community Preventive Services 
Task Force and the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices, including the examination of how each task force's 
recommendations interact at the nexus of clinic and commu- 
nity. 

"(5) Operation. — Operation. In carrying out the duties 
under paragraph (2), the Task Force is not subject to the provi- 
sions of Appendix 2 of title 5, United States Code. 

"(6) Independence. — All members of the Task Force con- 
vened under this subsection, and any recommendations made 
by such members, shall be independent and, to the extent prac- 
ticable, not subject to political pressure. 

"(7) Authorization of appropriations. — There are au- 
thorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for 
each fiscal year to carry out the activities of the Task Force.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4003\399U PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



468 



(b) Community Preventive Services Task Force. — 

(1) In general.— Part P of title III of the Public Health 
Service Act, as amended by paragraph (2), is amended by add- 
ing at the end the following: 

"SEC. 399U [42 U.S.C. 280g-10]. COMMUNITY PREVENTIVE SERVICES 
TASK FORCE. 

"(a) Establishment and Purpose. — The Director of the Cen- 
ters for Disease Control and Prevention shall convene an inde- 
pendent Community Preventive Services Task Force (referred to in 
this subsection as the 'Task Force') to be composed of individuals 
with appropriate expertise. Such Task Force shall review the sci- 
entific evidence related to the effectiveness, appropriateness, and 
cost-effectiveness of community preventive interventions for the 
purpose of developing recommendations, to be published in the 
Guide to Community Preventive Services (referred to in this sec- 
tion as the 'Guide'), for individuals and organizations delivering 
population-based services, including primary care professionals, 
health care systems, professional societies, employers, community 
organizations, non-profit organizations, schools, governmental pub- 
lic health agencies, Indian tribes, tribal organizations and urban 
Indian organizations, medical groups, Congress and other policy- 
makers. Community preventive services include any policies, pro- 
grams, processes or activities designed to affect or otherwise affect- 
ing health at the population level. 

"(b) Duties. — The duties of the Task Force shall include — 

"(1) the development of additional topic areas for new rec- 
ommendations and interventions related to those topic areas, 
including those related to specific populations and age groups, 
as well as the social, economic and physical environments that 
can have broad effects on the health and disease of populations 
and health disparities among sub-populations and age groups; 

"(2) at least once during every 5-year period, review inter- 
ventions and update recommendations related to existing topic 
areas, including new or improved techniques to assess the 
health effects of interventions, including health impact assess- 
ment and population health modeling; 

"(3) improved integration with Federal Government health 
objectives and related target setting for health improvement; 
"(4) the enhanced dissemination of recommendations; 
"(5) the provision of technical assistance to those health 
care professionals, agencies, and organizations that request 
help in implementing the Guide recommendations; and 

"(6) providing yearly reports to Congress and related agen- 
cies identifying gaps in research and recommending priority 
areas that deserve further examination, including areas re- 
lated to populations and age groups not adequately addressed 
by current recommendations. 

"(c) Role of Agency. — The Director shall provide ongoing ad- 
ministrative, research, and technical support for the operations of 
the Task Force, including coordinating and supporting the dissemi- 
nation of the recommendations of the Task Force, ensuring ade- 
quate staff resources, and assistance to those organizations re- 
questing it for implementation of Guide recommendations. 

June 9, 2010 



469 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4004 



"(d) Coordination With Preventive Services Task Force. — 
The Task Force shall take appropriate steps to coordinate its work 
with the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force and the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices, including the examination 
of how each task force's recommendations interact at the nexus of 
clinic and community. 

"(e) Operation. — In carrying out the duties under subsection 
(b), the Task Force shall not be subject to the provisions of Appen- 
dix 2 of title 5, United States Code. 

"(f) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are authorized 
to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each fiscal 
year to carry out the activities of the Task Force.". 
(2) Technical amendments. — 

(A) Section 399R of the Public Health Service Act (as 
added by section 2 of the ALS Registry Act (Public Law 
110-373; 122 Stat. 4047)) is redesignated as section 399S. 

(B) Section 399R of such Act (as added by section 3 of 
the Prenatally and Postnatally Diagnosed Conditions 
Awareness Act (Public Law 110-374; 122 Stat. 4051)) is 
redesignated as section 399T. 

SEC. 4004 [42 U.S.C. 300u-12]. EDUCATION AND OUTREACH CAMPAIGN 
REGARDING PREVENTIVE BENEFITS. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices (referred to in this section as the "Secretary") shall provide for 
the planning and implementation of a national public-private part- 
nership for a prevention and health promotion outreach and edu- 
cation campaign to raise public awareness of health improvement 
across the life span. Such campaign shall include the dissemination 
of information that — 

(1) describes the importance of utilizing preventive serv- 
ices to promote wellness, reduce health disparities, and miti- 
gate chronic disease; 

(2) promotes the use of preventive services recommended 
by the United States Preventive Services Task Force and the 
Community Preventive Services Task Force; 

(3) encourages healthy behaviors linked to the prevention 
of chronic diseases; 

(4) explains the preventive services covered under health 
plans offered through an Exchange; [As revised by section 
10401(c)! 

(5) describes additional preventive care supported by the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Health Re- 
sources and Services Administration, the Substance Abuse and 
Mental Health Services Administration, the Advisory Com- 
mittee on Immunization Practices, and other appropriate agen- 
cies; and 

(6) includes general health promotion information. 

(b) Consultation. — In coordinating the campaign under sub- 
section (a), the Secretary shall consult with the Institute of Medi- 
cine to provide ongoing advice on evidence-based scientific informa- 
tion for policy, program development, and evaluation. 

(c) Media Campaign. — 

(1) In general. — Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary, acting through the Direc- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4004 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



470 



tor of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall es- 
tablish and implement a national science-based media cam- 
paign on health promotion and disease prevention. 

(2) Requirement of campaign. — The campaign imple- 
mented under paragraph (1) — 

(A) shall be designed to address proper nutrition, reg- 
ular exercise, smoking cessation, obesity reduction, the 5 
leading disease killers in the United States, and secondary 
prevention through disease screening promotion; 

(B) shall be carried out through competitively bid con- 
tracts awarded to entities providing for the professional 
production and design of such campaign; 

(C) may include the use of television, radio, Internet, 
and other commercial marketing venues and may be tar- 
geted to specific age groups based on peer-reviewed social 
research; 

(D) shall not be duplicative of any other Federal ef- 
forts relating to health promotion and disease prevention; 
and 

(E) may include the use of humor and nationally rec- 
ognized positive role models. 

(3) Evaluation. — The Secretary shall ensure that the 
campaign implemented under paragraph (1) is subject to an 
independent evaluation every 2 years and shall report every 2 
years to Congress on the effectiveness of such campaigns to- 
wards meeting science-based metrics. 

(d) Website. — The Secretary, in consultation with private-sec- 
tor experts, shall maintain or enter into a contract to maintain an 
Internet website to provide science-based information on guidelines 
for nutrition, regular exercise, obesity reduction, smoking cessation, 
and specific chronic disease prevention. Such website shall be de- 
signed to provide information to health care providers and con- 
sumers. 

(e) Dissemination of Information Through Providers. — 
The Secretary, acting through the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, shall develop and implement a plan for the dissemina- 
tion of health promotion and disease prevention information con- 
sistent with national priorities, to health care providers who par- 
ticipate in Federal programs, including programs administered by 
the Indian Health Service, the Department of Veterans Affairs, the 
Department of Defense, and the Health Resources and Services Ad- 
ministration, and Medicare and Medicaid. 

(f) Personalized Prevention Plans. — 

(1) Contract. — The Secretary, acting through the Director 
of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall enter 
into a contract with a qualified entity for the development and 
operation of a Federal Internet website personalized preven- 
tion plan tool. 

(2) Use. — The website developed under paragraph (1) shall 
be designed to be used as a source of the most up-to-date sci- 
entific evidence relating to disease prevention for use by indi- 
viduals. Such website shall contain a component that enables 
an individual to determine their disease risk (based on per- 
sonal health and family history, BMI, and other relevant infor- 

June 9, 2010 



471 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4101 



mation) relating to the 5 leading diseases in the United States, 
and obtain personalized suggestions for preventing such dis- 
eases. 

(g) Internet Portal. — The Secretary shall establish an Inter- 
net portal for accessing risk-assessment tools developed and main- 
tained by private and academic entities. 

(h) Priority Funding. — Funding for the activities authorized 
under this section shall take priority over funding provided 
through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for grants 
to States and other entities for similar purposes and goals as pro- 
vided for in this section. Not to exceed $500,000,000 shall be ex- 
pended on the campaigns and activities required under this section. 

(i) Public Awareness of Preventive and Obesity-related 
Services. — 

(1) Information to states. — The Secretary of Health and 
Human Services shall provide guidance and relevant informa- 
tion to States and health care providers regarding preventive 
and obesity-related services that are available to Medicaid en- 
rollees, including obesity screening and counseling for children 
and adults. 

(2) Information to enrollees. — Each State shall design 
a public awareness campaign to educate Medicaid enrollees re- 
garding availability and coverage of such services, with the 
goal of reducing incidences of obesity. 

(3) Report. — Not later than January 1, 2011, and every 3 
years thereafter through January 1, 2017, the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services shall report to Congress on the 
status and effectiveness of efforts under paragraphs (1) and (2), 
including summaries of the States' efforts to increase aware- 
ness of coverage of obesity-related services. 

(j) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are authorized 
to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this 
section. 

Subtitle B — Increasing Access to Clinical 
Preventive Services 

SEC. 4101 [42 U.S.C. 280h-4]. SCHOOL-BASED HEALTH CENTERS. 

(a) Grants for the Establishment of School-based 
Health Centers. — 

(1) Program. — The Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices (in this subsection referred to as the "Secretary") shall es- 
tablish a program to award grants to eligible entities to sup- 
port the operation of school-based health centers. 

(2) Eligibility. — To be eligible for a grant under this sub- 
section, an entity shall — 

(A) be a school-based health center or a sponsoring fa- 
cility of a school-based health center; and 

(B) submit an application at such time, in such man- 
ner, and containing such information as the Secretary may 
require, including at a minimum an assurance that funds 
awarded under the grant shall not be used to provide any 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4101N399Z-1 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



472 



service that is not authorized or allowed by Federal, State, 
or local law. 

(3) Preference. — In awarding grants under this section, 
the Secretary shall give preference to awarding grants for 
school-based health centers that serve a large population of 
children eligible for medical assistance under the State Med- 
icaid plan under title XIX of the Social Security Act or under 
a waiver of such plan or children eligible for child health as- 
sistance under the State child health plan under title XXI of 
that Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.). 

(4) Limitation on use of funds. — An eligible entity shall 
use funds provided under a grant awarded under this sub- 
section only for expenditures for facilities (including the acqui- 
sition or improvement of land, or the acquisition, construction, 
expansion, replacement, or other improvement of any building 
or other facility), equipment, or similar expenditures, as speci- 
fied by the Secretary. No funds provided under a grant award- 
ed under this section shall be used for expenditures for per- 
sonnel or to provide health services. 

(5) Appropriations. — Out of any funds in the Treasury 
not otherwise appropriated, there is appropriated for each of 
fiscal years 2010 through 2013, $50,000,000 for the purpose of 
carrying out this subsection. Funds appropriated under this 
paragraph shall remain available until expended. 

(6) Definitions. — In this subsection, the terms "school- 
based health center" and "sponsoring facility" have the mean- 
ings given those terms in section 2110(c)(9) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1397jj(cX9)). 

(b) Grants for the Operation of School-based Health 
Centers. — Part Q of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 280h et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"SEC. 399Z-1 [42 U.S.C. 280h-5]. SCHOOL-BASED HEALTH CENTERS. 

"(a) Definitions; Establishment of Criteria. — In this sec- 
tion: 

"(1) Comprehensive primary health services. — The 
term 'comprehensive primary health services' means the core 
services offered by school -based health centers, which shall in- 
clude the following: 

"(A) Physical. — Comprehensive health assessments, 
diagnosis, and treatment of minor, acute, and chronic med- 
ical conditions, and referrals to, and follow-up for, spe- 
cialty care and oral and vision health services. [As revised 
by section 10402(a)] 

"(B) Mental health. — Mental health and substance 
use disorder assessments, crisis intervention, counseling, 
treatment, and referral to a continuum of services includ- 
ing emergency psychiatric care, community support pro- 
grams, inpatient care, and outpatient programs. 
"(2) Medically underserved children and adoles- 
cents. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'medically underserved 
children and adolescents' means a population of children 
and adolescents who are residents of an area designated as 

June 9, 2010 



473 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4101X399Z-1 PHSA 



a medically underserved area or a health professional 
shortage area by the Secretary. 

"(B) Criteria. — The Secretary shall prescribe criteria 
for determining the specific shortages of personal health 
services for medically underserved children and adoles- 
cents under subparagraph (A) that shall — 

"(i) take into account any comments received by 
the Secretary from the chief executive officer of a 
State and local officials in a State; and 

"(ii) include factors indicative of the health status 
of such children and adolescents of an area, including 
the ability of the residents of such area to pay for 
health services, the accessibility of such services, the 
availability of health professionals to such children 
and adolescents, and other factors as determined ap- 
propriate by the Secretary. 
"(3) School-based health center. — The term 'school- 
based health center' means a health clinic that — 

"(A) meets the definition of a school-based health cen- 
ter under section 2110(c)(9)(A) of the Social Security Act 
and is administered by a sponsoring facility (as defined in 
section 2110(c)(9)(B) of the Social Security Act); 

"(B) provides, at a minimum, comprehensive primary 
health services during school hours to children and adoles- 
cents by health professionals in accordance with estab- 
lished standards, community practice, reporting laws, and 
other State laws, including parental consent and notifica- 
tion laws that are not inconsistent with Federal law; and 
"(C) does not perform abortion services. 
"(b) Authority To Award Grants. — The Secretary shall 
award grants for the costs of the operation of school-based health 
centers (referred to in this section as 'SBHCs') that meet the re- 
quirements of this section. 

"(c) Applications. — To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section, an entity shall — 

"(1) be an SBHC (as defined in subsection (a)(3)); and 
"(2) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
in such manner, and containing — 

"(A) evidence that the applicant meets all criteria nec- 
essary to be designated an SBHC; 

"(B) evidence of local need for the services to be pro- 
vided by the SBHC; 

"(C) an assurance that — 

"(i) SBHC services will be provided to those chil- 
dren and adolescents for whom parental or guardian 
consent has been obtained in cooperation with Fed- 
eral, State, and local laws governing health care serv- 
ice provision to children and adolescents; 

"(ii) the SBHC has made and will continue to 
make every reasonable effort to establish and main- 
tain collaborative relationships with other health care 
providers in the catchment area of the SBHC; 

"(hi) the SBHC will provide on-site access during 
the academic day when school is in session and 24- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4101N399Z-1 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



474 



hour coverage through an on-call system and through 
its backup health providers to ensure access to serv- 
ices on a year-round basis when the school or the 
SBHC is closed; 

"(iv) the SBHC will be integrated into the school 
environment and will coordinate health services with 
school personnel, such as administrators, teachers, 
nurses, counselors, and support personnel, as well as 
with other community providers co-located at the 
school; 

"(v) the SBHC sponsoring facility assumes all re- 
sponsibility for the SBHC administration, operations, 
and oversight; and 

"(vi) the SBHC will comply with Federal, State, 
and local laws concerning patient privacy and student 
records, including regulations promulgated under the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 
1996 and section 444 of the General Education Provi- 
sions Act; and 

"(D) such other information as the Secretary may re- 
quire. 

"(d) Preferences and Consideration. — In reviewing applica- 
tions: 

"(1) The Secretary may give preference to applicants who 
demonstrate an ability to serve the following: 

"(A) Communities that have evidenced barriers to pri- 
mary health care and mental health and substance use 
disorder prevention services for children and adolescents. 

"(B) Communities with high per capita numbers of 
children and adolescents who are uninsured, underinsured, 
or enrolled in public health insurance programs. 

"(C) Populations of children and adolescents that have 
historically demonstrated difficulty in accessing health and 
mental health and substance use disorder prevention serv- 
ices. 

"(2) The Secretary may give consideration to whether an 
applicant has received a grant under subsection (a) of section 
4101 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
"(e) Waiver of Requirements. — The Secretary may — 

"(1) under appropriate circumstances, waive the applica- 
tion of all or part of the requirements of this subsection with 
respect to an SBHC for not to exceed 2 years; and 

"(2) upon a showing of good cause, waive the requirement 
that the SBHC provide all required comprehensive primary 
health services for a designated period of time to be deter- 
mined by the Secretary. 
"(f) Use of Funds. — 

"(1) Funds. — Funds awarded under a grant under this sec- 
tion — 

"(A) may be used for — 

"(i) acquiring and leasing equipment (including 
the costs of amortizing the principle of, and paying in- 
terest on, loans for such equipment); 

June 9, 2010 



475 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4101X399Z-1 PHSA 



"(ii) providing training related to the provision of 
required comprehensive primary health services and 
additional health services; 

"(hi) the management and operation of health cen- 
ter programs; 

"(iv) the payment of salaries for physicians, 
nurses, and other personnel of the SBHC; and 
"(B) may not be used to provide abortions. 
"(2) Construction. — The Secretary may award grants 
which may be used to pay the costs associated with expanding 
and modernizing existing buildings for use as an SBHC, in- 
cluding the purchase of trailers or manufactured buildings to 
install on the school property. 
"(3) Limitations. — 

"(A) In general. — Any provider of services that is de- 
termined by a State to be in violation of a State law de- 
scribed in subsection (a)(3)(B) with respect to activities 
carried out at a SBHC shall not be eligible to receive addi- 
tional funding under this section. 

"(B) No overlapping grant period. — No entity that 
has received funding under section 330 for a grant period 
shall be eligible for a grant under this section for with re- 
spect to the same grant period. 
"(g) Matching Requirement. — 

"(1) In general. — Each eligible entity that receives a 
grant under this section shall provide, from non-Federal 
sources, an amount equal to 20 percent of the amount of the 
grant (which may be provided in cash or in-kind) to carry out 
the activities supported by the grant. 

"(2) Watver. — The Secretary may waive all or part of the 
matching requirement described in paragraph (1) for any fiscal 
year for the SBHC if the Secretary determines that applying 
the matching requirement to the SBHC would result in serious 
hardship or an inability to carry out the purposes of this sec- 
tion. 

"(h) Supplement, Not Supplant. — Grant funds provided 
under this section shall be used to supplement, not supplant, other 
Federal or State funds. 

"(i) Evaluation. — The Secretary shall develop and implement 
a plan for evaluating SBHCs and monitoring quality performance 
under the awards made under this section. 

"(j) Age Appropriate Services. — An eligible entity receiving 
funds under this section shall only provide age appropriate services 
through a SBHC funded under this section to an individual. 

"(k) Parental Consent. — An eligible entity receiving funds 
under this section shall not provide services through a SBHC fund- 
ed under this section to an individual without the consent of the 
parent or guardian of such individual if such individual is consid- 
ered a minor under applicable State law. 

"(1) Authorization of Appropriations. — For purposes of car- 
rying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such 
sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2010 through 
2014.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4102 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



476 



SEC. 4102. ORAL HEALTHCARE PREVENTION ACTIVITIES. 

(a) In General.— Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 241 et seq.), as amended by section 3025, is amended by 
adding at the end the following: 

"PART T— ORAL HEALTHCARE PREVENTION 

ACTIVITIES 

"SEC. 399LL [42 U.S.C. 280k]. ORAL HEALTHCARE PREVENTION EDU- 
CATION CAMPAIGN. 

"(a) Establishment. — The Secretary, acting through the Direc- 
tor of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and in con- 
sultation with professional oral health organizations, shall, subject 
to the availability of appropriations, establish a 5-year national, 
public education campaign (referred to in this section as the 'cam- 
paign') that is focused on oral healthcare prevention and education, 
including prevention of oral disease such as early childhood and 
other caries, periodontal disease, and oral cancer. 

"(b) Requirements. — In establishing the campaign, the Sec- 
retary shall — 

"(1) ensure that activities are targeted towards specific 
populations such as children, pregnant women, parents, the el- 
derly, individuals with disabilities, and ethnic and racial mi- 
nority populations, including Indians, Alaska Natives and Na- 
tive Hawaiians (as defined in section 4(c) of the Indian Health 
Care Improvement Act) in a culturally and linguistically appro- 
priate manner; and 

"(2) utilize science-based strategies to convey oral health 
prevention messages that include, but are not limited to, com- 
munity water fluoridation and dental sealants. 
"(c) Planning and Implementation. — Not later than 2 years 
after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall 
begin implementing the 5-year campaign. During the 2-year period 
referred to in the previous sentence, the Secretary shall conduct 
planning activities with respect to the campaign. 

"SEC. 399LL-1 [42 U.S.C. 280k-l]. RESEARCH-BASED DENTAL CARIES 
DISEASE MANAGEMENT. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary, acting through the Director 
of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall award 
demonstration grants to eligible entities to demonstrate the effec- 
tiveness of research-based dental caries disease management ac- 
tivities. 

"(b) Eligibility. — To be eligible for a grant under this section, 
an entity shall — 

"(1) be a community -based provider of dental services (as 
defined by the Secretary), including a Federally-qualified 
health center, a clinic of a hospital owned or operated by a 
State (or by an instrumentality or a unit of government within 
a State), a State or local department of health, a dental pro- 
gram of the Indian Health Service, an Indian tribe or tribal or- 
ganization, or an urban Indian organization (as such terms are 
defined in section 4 of the Indian Health Care Improvement 
Act), a health system provider, a private provider of dental 

June 9, 2010 



477 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4102 



services, medical, dental, public health, nursing, nutrition edu- 
cational institutions, or national organizations involved in im- 
proving children's oral health; and 

"(2) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
in such manner, and containing such information as the Sec- 
retary may require. 

"(c) Use of Funds. — A grantee shall use amounts received 
under a grant under this section to demonstrate the effectiveness 
of research-based dental caries disease management activities. 

"(d) Use of Information. — The Secretary shall utilize infor- 
mation generated from grantees under this section in planning and 
implementing the public education campaign under section 399LL. 

"SEC. 399LL-2 [42 U.S.C. 280k-2]. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIA- 
TIONS. 

"There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part, 
such sums as may be necessary.". 

(b) School-based Sealant Programs. — Section 317M(c)(l) of 
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247b-14(c)(l)) is amended 
by striking "may award grants to States and Indian tribes" and in- 
serting "shall award a grant to each of the 50 States and territories 
and to Indians, Indian tribes, tribal organizations and urban In- 
dian organizations (as such terms are defined in section 4 of the 
Indian Health Care Improvement Act)". 

(c) Oral Health Infrastructure. — Section 317M of the Pub- 
lic Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247b-14) is amended— 

(1) by redesignating subsections (d) and (e) as subsections 
(e) and (f), respectively; and 

(2) by inserting after subsection (c), the following: 
"(d) Oral Health Infrastructure. — 

"(1) Cooperative agreements. — The Secretary, acting 
through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, shall enter into cooperative agreements with State, 
territorial, and Indian tribes or tribal organizations (as those 
terms are denned in section 4 of the Indian Health Care Im- 
provement Act) to establish oral health leadership and pro- 
gram guidance, oral health data collection and interpretation, 
(including determinants of poor oral health among vulnerable 
populations), a multi-dimensional delivery system for oral 
health, and to implement science-based programs (including 
dental sealants and community water fluoridation) to improve 
oral health. 

"(2) Authorization of appropriations. — There is author- 
ized to be appropriated such sums as necessary to carry out 
this subsection for fiscal years 2010 through 2014.". 

(d) Updating National Oral Healthcare Surveillance Ac- 
tivities.— [42 U.S.C.280k-3] 

(1) PRAMS.— 

(A) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services (referred to in this subsection as the "Secretary") 
shall carry out activities to update and improve the Preg- 
nancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System (referred to in 
this section as "PRAMS") as it relates to oral healthcare. 

(B) State reports and mandatory measurements. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4103 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



478 



(i) In general. — Not later than 5 years after the 
date of enactment of this Act, and every 5 years there- 
after, a State shall submit to the Secretary a report 
concerning activities conducted within the State under 
PRAMS. 

(ii) Measurements. — The oral healthcare meas- 
urements developed by the Secretary for use under 
PRAMS shall be mandatory with respect to States for 
purposes of the State reports under clause (i). 

(C) Funding. — There is authorized to be appropriated 
to carry out this paragraph, such sums as may be nec- 
essary. 

(2) National health and nutrition examination sur- 
vey. — The Secretary shall develop oral healthcare components 
that shall include tooth-level surveillance for inclusion in the 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Such com- 
ponents shall be updated by the Secretary at least every 6 
years. For purposes of this paragraph, the term "tooth-level 
surveillance" means a clinical examination where an examiner 
looks at each dental surface, on each tooth in the mouth and 
as expanded by the Division of Oral Health of the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention. 

(3) Medical expenditures panel survey. — The Secretary 
shall ensure that the Medical Expenditures Panel Survey by 
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality includes the 
verification of dental utilization, expenditure, and coverage 
findings through conduct of a look-back analysis. 

(4) National oral health surveillance system. — 

(A) Appropriations. — There is authorized to be appro- 
priated, such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal 
years 2010 through 2014 to increase the participation of 
States in the National Oral Health Surveillance System 
from 16 States to all 50 States, territories, and District of 
Columbia. 

(B) Requirements. — The Secretary shall ensure that 
the National Oral Health Surveillance System include the 
measurement of early childhood caries. 

SEC. 4103. MEDICARE COVERAGE OF ANNUAL WELLNESS VISIT PRO- 
VIDING A personalized prevention plan. 

(a) Coverage of Personalized Prevention Plan Services. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1861(s)(2) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(s)(2)) is amended— 

(A) in subparagraph (DD), by striking "and" at the 

end; 

(B) in subparagraph (EE), by adding "and" at the end; 

and 

(C) by adding at the end the following new subpara- 
graph: 

"(FF) personalized prevention plan services (as defined in 
subsection (hhh));". 

(2) Conforming amendments. — Clauses (i) and (ii) of sec- 
tion 1861(s)(2)(K) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395x(s)(2)(K)) are each amended by striking "subsection 
(ww)(l)" and inserting "subsections (ww)(l) and (hhh)". 

June 9, 2010 



479 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4103 



(b) Personalized Prevention Plan Services Defined. — Sec- 
tion 1861 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is amended 
by adding at the end the following new subsection: 

"Annual Wellness Visit 

"(hhh)(l) The term 'personalized prevention plan services' 
means the creation of a plan for an individual — 

"(A) that includes a health risk assessment (that meets the 
guidelines established by the Secretary under paragraph 
(4)(A)) of the individual that is completed prior to or as part 
of the same visit with a health professional described in para- 
graph (3); and 

"(B) that— 

"(i) takes into account the results of the health risk as- 
sessment; and 

"(ii) may contain the elements described in paragraph 

(2). 

"(2) Subject to paragraph (4)(H), the elements described in this 
paragraph are the following: 

"(A) The establishment of, or an update to, the individual's 
medical and family history. 

"(B) A list of current providers and suppliers that are regu- 
larly involved in providing medical care to the individual (in- 
cluding a list of all prescribed medications). 

"(C) A measurement of height, weight, body mass index (or 
waist circumference, if appropriate), blood pressure, and other 
routine measurements. 

"(D) Detection of any cognitive impairment. 
"(E) The establishment of, or an update to, the following: 
"(i) A screening schedule for the next 5 to 10 years, as 
appropriate, based on recommendations of the United 
States Preventive Services Task Force and the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices, and the individ- 
ual's health status, screening history, and age-appropriate 
preventive services covered under this title. 

"(ii) A list of risk factors and conditions for which pri- 
mary, secondary, or tertiary prevention interventions are 
recommended or are underway, including any mental 
health conditions or any such risk factors or conditions 
that have been identified through an initial preventive 
physical examination (as described under subsection 
(ww)(l)), and a list of treatment options and their associ- 
ated risks and benefits. 

"(F) The furnishing of personalized health advice and a re- 
ferral, as appropriate, to health education or preventive coun- 
seling services or programs aimed at reducing identified risk 
factors and improving self-management, or community-based 
lifestyle interventions to reduce health risks and promote self- 
management and wellness, including weight loss, physical ac- 
tivity, smoking cessation, fall prevention, and nutrition. 

"(G) Any other element determined appropriate by the Sec- 
retary. 

"(3) A health professional described in this paragraph is — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4103 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



480 



"(A) a physician; 

"(B) a practitioner described in clause (i) of section 
1842(b)(18)(C); or 

"(C) a medical professional (including a health educator, 
registered dietitian, or nutrition professional) or a team of 
medical professionals, as determined appropriate by the Sec- 
retary, under the supervision of a physician. 
"(4)(A) For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), the Secretary, not 
later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this subsection, 
shall establish publicly available guidelines for health risk assess- 
ments. Such guidelines shall be developed in consultation with rel- 
evant groups and entities and shall provide that a health risk as- 
sessment — 

"(i) identify chronic diseases, injury risks, modifiable risk 
factors, and urgent health needs of the individual; and 
"(ii) may be furnished — 

"(I) through an interactive telephonic or web-based 
program that meets the standards established under sub- 
paragraph (B); 

"(II) during an encounter with a health care profes- 
sional; 

"(III) through community-based prevention programs; 

or 

"(IV) through any other means the Secretary deter- 
mines appropriate to maximize accessibility and ease of 
use by beneficiaries, while ensuring the privacy of such 
beneficiaries. 

"(B) Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this 
subsection, the Secretary shall establish standards for interactive 
telephonic or web-based programs used to furnish health risk as- 
sessments under subparagraph (A)(ii)(I). The Secretary may utilize 
any health risk assessment developed under section 4004(f) of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act as part of the require- 
ment to develop a personalized prevention plan to comply with this 
subparagraph. 

"(C)(i) Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment 
of this subsection, the Secretary shall develop and make available 
to the public a health risk assessment model. Such model shall 
meet the guidelines under subparagraph (A) and may be used to 
meet the requirement under paragraph (1)(A). 

"(ii) Any health risk assessment that meets the guidelines 
under subparagraph (A) and is approved by the Secretary may be 
used to meet the requirement under paragraph (1)(A). 

"(D) The Secretary may coordinate with community-based enti- 
ties (including State Health Insurance Programs, Area Agencies on 
Aging, Aging and Disability Resource Centers, and the Administra- 
tion on Aging) to — 

"(i) ensure that health risk assessments are accessible to 

beneficiaries; and 

"(ii) provide appropriate support for the completion of 

health risk assessments by beneficiaries. 

"(E) The Secretary shall establish procedures to make bene- 
ficiaries and providers aware of the requirement that a beneficiary 

June 9, 2010 



481 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4103 



complete a health risk assessment prior to or at the same time as 
receiving personalized prevention plan services. 

"(F) To the extent practicable, the Secretary shall encourage 
the use of, integration with, and coordination of health information 
technology (including use of technology that is compatible with 
electronic medical records and personal health records) and may 
experiment with the use of personalized technology to aid in the 
development of self-management skills and management of and ad- 
herence to provider recommendations in order to improve the 
health status of beneficiaries. 

"(G) A beneficiary shall be eligible to receive only an initial 
preventive physical examination (as defined under subsection 
(ww)(l)) during the 12-month period after the date that the bene- 
ficiary's coverage begins under part B and shall be eligible to re- 
ceive personalized prevention plan services under this subsection 
each year thereafter provided that the beneficiary has not received 
either an initial preventive physical examination or personalized 
prevention plan services within the preceding 12-month period. 
[Replaced by section 10402(bJ\ 

"(H) The Secretary shall issue guidance that — 

"(i) identifies elements under paragraph (2) that are re- 
quired to be provided to a beneficiary as part of their first visit 
for personalized prevention plan services; and 

"(ii) establishes a yearly schedule for appropriate provision 
of such elements thereafter.", 
(c) Payment and Elimination of Cost-Sharing. — 

(1) Payment and elimination of coinsurance. — Section 
1833(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 13951(a)(1)) is 
amended — 

(A) in subparagraph (N), by inserting "other than per- 
sonalized prevention plan services (as defined in section 
1861(hhh)(l))" after "(as defined in section 1848(j)(3))"; 

(B) by striking "and" before "(W)"; and 

(C) by inserting before the semicolon at the end the 
following: ", and (X) with respect to personalized preven- 
tion plan services (as defined in section 1861(hhh)(l)), the 
amount paid shall be 100 percent of the lesser of the ac- 
tual charge for the services or the amount determined 
under the payment basis determined under section 1848". 

(2) Payment under physician fee schedule. — Section 
1848(j)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(j)(3)) 
is amended by inserting "(2)(FF) (including administration of 
the health risk assessment) ," after "(2)(EE),". 

(3) Elimination of coinsurance in outpatient hospital 
settings. — 

(A) Exclusion from opd fee schedule. — Section 
1833(t)(l)(B)(iv) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
13951(t)(l)(B)(iv)) is amended by striking "and diagnostic 
mammography" and inserting ", diagnostic mammography, 
or personalized prevention plan services (as denned in sec- 
tion 1861(hhh)(l))". 

(B) Conforming amendments. — Section 1833(a)(2) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 13951(a)(2)) is amend- 
ed— 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4104 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



482 



(i) in subparagraph (F), by striking "and" at the 

end; 

(ii) in subparagraph (G)(ii), by striking the comma 
at the end and inserting "; and"; and 

(iii) by inserting after subparagraph (G)(ii) the fol- 
lowing new subparagraph: 

"(H) with respect to personalized prevention plan serv- 
ices (as defined in section 1861(hhh)(l)) furnished by an 
outpatient department of a hospital, the amount deter- 
mined under paragraph (1)(X),". 

(4) Waiver of application of deductible. — The first sen- 
tence of section 1833(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
13951(b)) is amended— 

(A) by striking "and" before "(9)"; and 

(B) by inserting before the period the following: ", and 
(10) such deductible shall not apply with respect to person- 
alized prevention plan services (as defined in section 
1861(hhh)(l))". 

(d) Frequency Limitation. — Section 1862(a) of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (1) — 

(A) in subparagraph (N), by striking "and" at the end; 

(B) in subparagraph (0), by striking the semicolon at 
the end and inserting ", and"; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following new subpara- 
graph: 

"(P) in the case of personalized prevention plan services 
(as defined in section 1861(hhh)(l)), which are performed more 
frequently than is covered under such section;"; and 

(2) in paragraph (7), by striking "or (K)" and inserting 
"(K), or (P)". 

(e) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 2011. 

SEC. 4104. REMOVAL OF BARRIERS TO PREVENTIVE SERVICES IN 
MEDICARE. 

(a) Definition of Preventive Services. — Section 1861(ddd) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(ddd)) is amended— 

(1) in the heading, by inserting "; Preventive Services" 
after "Services"; 

(2) in paragraph (1), by striking "not otherwise described 
in this title" and inserting "not described in subparagraph (A) 
or (C) of paragraph (3)"; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 
"(3) The term 'preventive services' means the following: 

"(A) The screening and preventive services described in 
subsection (ww)(2) (other than the service described in sub- 
paragraph (M) of such subsection). 

"(B) An initial preventive physical examination (as denned 
in subsection (ww)). 

"(C) Personalized prevention plan services (as defined in 
subsection (hhh)(l)).". 

(b) Payment and Elimination of Coinsurance in All Set- 
tings. — [Replaced by section 10406] Section 1833(a)(1) of the So- 

June 9, 2010 



483 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4105 



cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 13951(a)(1)), as amended by section 
4103(c)(1), is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (T), by inserting "(or 100 percent if 
such services are recommended with a grade of A or B by the 
United States Preventive Services Task Force for any indica- 
tion or population and are appropriate for the individual)" after 
"80 percent"; 

(2) in subparagraph (W) — 

(A) in clause (i), by inserting "(if such subparagraph 
were applied, by substituting '100 percent' for '80 per- 
cent')" after "subparagraph (D)"; and 

(B) in clause (ii), by striking "80 percent" and insert- 
ing "100 percent"; 

(3) by striking "and" before "(X)"; and 

(4) by inserting before the semicolon at the end the fol- 
lowing: ", and (Y) with respect to preventive services described 
in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 1861(ddd)(3) that are 
appropriate for the individual and, in the case of such services 
described in subparagraph (A), are recommended with a grade 
of A or B by the United States Preventive Services Task Force 
for any indication or population, the amount paid shall be 100 
percent of (i) except as provided in clause (ii), the lesser of the 
actual charge for the services or the amount determined under 
the fee schedule that applies to such services under this part, 
and (ii) in the case of such services that are covered OPD serv- 
ices (as defined in subsection (f)(1)(B)), the amount determined 
under subsection (t)". 

(c) Waiver of Application of Deductible for Preventive 
Services and Colorectal Cancer Screening Tests. — Section 
1833(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 13951(b)), as amended 
by section 4103(c)(4), is amended — 

(1) in paragraph (1), by striking "items and services de- 
scribed in section 1861(s)(10)(A)" and inserting "preventive 
services described in subparagraph (A) of section 1861(ddd)(3) 
that are recommended with a grade of A or B by the United 
States Preventive Services Task Force for any indication or 
population and are appropriate for the individual."; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new sentence: "Para- 
graph (1) of the first sentence of this subsection shall apply 
with respect to a colorectal cancer screening test regardless of 
the code that is billed for the establishment of a diagnosis as 
a result of the test, or for the removal of tissue or other matter 
or other procedure that is furnished in connection with, as a 
result of, and in the same clinical encounter as the screening 
test.". 

(d) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to items and services furnished on or after January 1, 
2011. 

SEC. 4105. EVIDENCE-BASED COVERAGE OF PREVENTD7E SERVICES IN 
MEDICARE. 

(a) Authority To Modify or Eliminate Coverage of Cer- 
tain Preventive Services. — Section 1834 of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new subsection: 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4106 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



484 



"(n) Authority To Modify or Eliminate Coverage of Cer- 
tain Preventive Services. — Notwithstanding any other provision 
of this title, effective beginning on January 1, 2010, if the Secretary 
determines appropriate, the Secretary may — 
"(1) modify— 

"(A) the coverage of any preventive service described 
in subparagraph (A) of section 1861(ddd)(3) to the extent 
that such modification is consistent with the recommenda- 
tions of the United States Preventive Services Task Force; 
and 

"(B) the services included in the initial preventive 
physical examination described in subparagraph (B) of 
such section; and 

"(2) provide that no payment shall be made under this title 
for a preventive service described in subparagraph (A) of such 
section that has not received a grade of A, B, C, or I by such 
Task Force.". 

(b) Construction. — Nothing in the amendment made by para- 
graph (1) shall be construed to affect the coverage of diagnostic or 
treatment services under title XVIII of the Social Security Act. 

SEC. 4106. IMPROVING ACCESS TO PREVENTIVE SERVICES FOR ELIGI- 
BLE ADULTS IN MEDICAID. 

(a) Clarification of Inclusion of Services. — Section 
1905(a)(13) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)(13)) is 
amended to read as follows: 

"(13) other diagnostic, screening, preventive, and rehabili- 
tative services, including — 

"(A) any clinical preventive services that are assigned 
a grade of A or B by the United States Preventive Services 
Task Force; 

"(B) with respect to an adult individual, approved vac- 
cines recommended by the Advisory Committee on Immu- 
nization Practices (an advisory committee established by 
the Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention) and their administra- 
tion; and 

"(C) any medical or remedial services (provided in a 
facility, a home, or other setting) recommended by a physi- 
cian or other licensed practitioner of the healing arts with- 
in the scope of their practice under State law, for the max- 
imum reduction of physical or mental disability and res- 
toration of an individual to the best possible functional 
level;". 

(b) Increased Fmap. — Section 1905(b) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(b)), as amended by sections 2001(a)(3)(A) and 
2004(c)(1), is amended in the first sentence — 

(1) by striking ", and (4)" and inserting ", (4)"; and 

(2) by inserting before the period the following: ", and (5) 
in the case of a State that provides medical assistance for serv- 
ices and vaccines described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of 
subsection (a)(13), and prohibits cost-sharing for such services 
and vaccines, the Federal medical assistance percentage, as de- 
termined under this subsection and subsection (y) (without re- 
gard to paragraph (1)(C) of such subsection), shall be increased 

June 9, 2010 



485 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4107 



by 1 percentage point with respect to medical assistance for 
such services and vaccines and for items and services described 
in subsection (a)(4)(D)". 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made under this sec- 
tion shall take effect on January 1, 2013. 

SEC. 4107. COVERAGE OF COMPREHENSIVE TOBACCO CESSATION 
SERVICES FOR PREGNANT WOMEN IN MEDICAID. 

(a) Requiring Coverage of Counseling and 
Pharmacotherapy for Cessation of Tobacco Use by Pregnant 
Women.— Section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396d), as amended by sections 2001(a)(3)(B) and 2303, is further 
amended — 

(1) in subsection (a)(4) — 

(A) by striking "and" before "(C)"; and 

(B) by inserting before the semicolon at the end the 
following new subparagraph: "; and (D) counseling and 
pharmacotherapy for cessation of tobacco use by pregnant 
women (as defined in subsection (bb))"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following: 

"(bb)(l) For purposes of this title, the term 'counseling and 
pharmacotherapy for cessation of tobacco use by pregnant women' 
means diagnostic, therapy, and counseling services and 
pharmacotherapy (including the coverage of prescription and non- 
prescription tobacco cessation agents approved by the Food and 
Drug Administration) for cessation of tobacco use by pregnant 
women who use tobacco products or who are being treated for to- 
bacco use that is furnished — 

"(A) by or under the supervision of a physician; or 
"(B) by any other health care professional who — 

"(i) is legally authorized to furnish such services under 
State law (or the State regulatory mechanism provided by 
State law) of the State in which the services are furnished; 
and 

"(ii) is authorized to receive payment for other services 
under this title or is designated by the Secretary for this 
purpose. 

"(2) Subject to paragraph (3), such term is limited to — 

"(A) services recommended with respect to pregnant 
women in 'Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence: 2008 Up- 
date: A Clinical Practice Guideline', published by the Public 
Health Service in May 2008, or any subsequent modification of 
such Guideline; and 

"(B) such other services that the Secretary recognizes to be 
effective for cessation of tobacco use by pregnant women. 
"(3) Such term shall not include coverage for drugs or 
biologicals that are not otherwise covered under this title.". 

(b) Exception From Optional Restriction Under Medicaid 
Prescription Drug Coverage— Section 1927(d)(2)(F) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(d)(2)(F)), as redesignated by sec- 
tion 2502(a), is amended by inserting before the period at the end 
the following: ", except, in the case of pregnant women when rec- 
ommended in accordance with the Guideline referred to in section 
1905(bb)(2)(A), agents approved by the Food and Drug Administra- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4108 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



486 



tion under the over-the-counter monograph process for purposes of 
promoting, and when used to promote, tobacco cessation". 

(c) Removal of Cost-Sharing for Counseling and 
Pharmacotherapy for Cessation of Tobacco Use by Pregnant 
Women. — 

(1) General cost-sharing limitations. — Section 1916 of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396o) is amended in each 
of subsections (a)(2)(B) and (b)(2)(B) by inserting ", and coun- 
seling and pharmacotherapy for cessation of tobacco use by 
pregnant women (as defined in section 1905(bb)) and covered 
outpatient drugs (as defined in subsection (k)(2) of section 1927 
and including nonprescription drugs described in subsection 

(d) (2) of such section) that are prescribed for purposes of pro- 
moting, and when used to promote, tobacco cessation by preg- 
nant women in accordance with the Guideline referred to in 
section 1905(bb)(2)(A)" after "complicate the pregnancy". 

(2) Application to alternative cost-sharing. — Section 
1916A(b)(3)(B)(iii) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396o-l(b)(3)(B)(iii)) 
is amended by inserting ", and counseling and 
pharmacotherapy for cessation of tobacco use by pregnant 
women (as defined in section 1905(bb))" after "complicate the 
pregnancy". 

(d) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall take effect on October 1, 2010. 

SEC. 4108 [42 U.S.C. 1396a note]. INCENTIVES FOR PREVENTION OF 
CHRONIC DISEASES IN MEDICAID. 

(a) Initiatives. — 

(1) Establishment. — 

(A) In general. — The Secretary shall award grants to 
States to carry out initiatives to provide incentives to Med- 
icaid beneficiaries who — 

(i) successfully participate in a program described 
in paragraph (3); and 

(ii) upon completion of such participation, dem- 
onstrate changes in health risk and outcomes, includ- 
ing the adoption and maintenance of healthy behav- 
iors by meeting specific targets (as described in sub- 
section (c)(2)). 

(B) Purpose. — The purpose of the initiatives under 
this section is to test approaches that may encourage be- 
havior modification and determine scalable solutions. 

(2) Duration. — 

(A) Initiation of program; resources. — The Sec- 
retary shall awards grants to States beginning on January 
1, 2011, or beginning on the date on which the Secretary 
develops program criteria, whichever is earlier. The Sec- 
retary shall develop program criteria for initiatives under 
this section using relevant evidence-based research and re- 
sources, including the Guide to Community Preventive 
Services, the Guide to Clinical Preventive Services, and 
the National Registry of Evidence-Based Programs and 
Practices. 

(B) Duration of program. — A State awarded a grant 
to carry out initiatives under this section shall carry out 

June 9, 2010 



487 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4108 



such initiatives within the 5-year period beginning on Jan- 
uary 1, 2011, or beginning on the date on which the Sec- 
retary develops program criteria, whichever is earlier. Ini- 
tiatives under this section shall be carried out by a State 
for a period of not less than 3 years. 

(3) Program described. — 

(A) In general. — A program described in this para- 
graph is a comprehensive, evidence-based, widely avail- 
able, and easily accessible program, proposed by the State 
and approved by the Secretary, that is designed and 
uniquely suited to address the needs of Medicaid bene- 
ficiaries and has demonstrated success in helping individ- 
uals achieve one or more of the following: 

(i) Ceasing use of tobacco products. 

(ii) Controlling or reducing their weight. 

(iii) Lowering their cholesterol. 

(iv) Lowering their blood pressure. 

(v) Avoiding the onset of diabetes or, in the case 
of a diabetic, improving the management of that condi- 
tion. 

(B) Co-morbidities. — A program under this section 
may also address co-morbidities (including depression) that 
are related to any of the conditions described in subpara- 
graph (A). 

(C) Waiver authority. — The Secretary may waive the 
requirements of section 1902(a)(1) (relating to 
statewideness) of the Social Security Act for a State 
awarded a grant to conduct an initiative under this section 
and shall ensure that a State makes any program de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A) available and accessible to 
Medicaid beneficiaries. 

(D) Flexibility in implementation. — A State may 
enter into arrangements with providers participating in 
Medicaid, community-based organizations, faith-based or- 
ganizations, public-private partnerships, Indian tribes, or 
similar entities or organizations to carry out programs de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A). 

(4) Application. — Following the development of program 
criteria by the Secretary, a State may submit an application, 
in such manner and containing such information as the Sec- 
retary may require, that shall include a proposal for programs 
described in paragraph (3)(A) and a plan to make Medicaid 
beneficiaries and providers participating in Medicaid who re- 
side in the State aware and informed about such programs. 

(b) Education and Outreach Campaign. — 

(1) State awareness. — The Secretary shall conduct an 
outreach and education campaign to make States aware of the 
grants under this section. 

(2) Provider and beneficiary education. — A State 
awarded a grant to conduct an initiative under this section 
shall conduct an outreach and education campaign to make 
Medicaid beneficiaries and providers participating in Medicaid 
who reside in the State aware of the programs described in 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4108 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



488 



subsection (a)(3) that are to be carried out by the State under 
the grant. 

(c) Impact. — A State awarded a grant to conduct an initiative 
under this section shall develop and implement a system to — 

(1) track Medicaid beneficiary participation in the program 
and validate changes in health risk and outcomes with clinical 
data, including the adoption and maintenance of health behav- 
iors by such beneficiaries; 

(2) to the extent practicable, establish standards and 
health status targets for Medicaid beneficiaries participating in 
the program and measure the degree to which such standards 
and targets are met; 

(3) evaluate the effectiveness of the program and provide 
the Secretary with such evaluations; 

(4) report to the Secretary on processes that have been de- 
veloped and lessons learned from the program; and 

(5) report on preventive services as part of reporting on 
quality measures for Medicaid managed care programs. 

(d) Evaluations and Reports. — 

(1) Independent assessment. — The Secretary shall enter 
into a contract with an independent entity or organization to 
conduct an evaluation and assessment of the initiatives carried 
out by States under this section, for the purpose of deter- 
mining — 

(A) the effect of such initiatives on the use of health 
care services by Medicaid beneficiaries participating in the 
program; 

(B) the extent to which special populations (including 
adults with disabilities, adults with chronic illnesses, and 
children with special health care needs) are able to partici- 
pate in the program; 

(C) the level of satisfaction of Medicaid beneficiaries 
with respect to the accessibility and quality of health care 
services provided through the program; and 

(D) the administrative costs incurred by State agencies 
that are responsible for administration of the program. 

(2) State reporting. — A State awarded a grant to carry 
out initiatives under this section shall submit reports to the 
Secretary, on a semi-annual basis, regarding the programs that 
are supported by the grant funds. Such report shall include in- 
formation, as specified by the Secretary, regarding — 

(A) the specific uses of the grant funds; 

(B) an assessment of program implementation and les- 
sons learned from the programs; 

(C) an assessment of quality improvements and clin- 
ical outcomes under such programs; and 

(D) estimates of cost savings resulting from such pro- 
grams. 

(3) Initial report. — Not later than January 1, 2014, the 
Secretary shall submit to Congress an initial report on such 
initiatives based on information provided by States through re- 
ports required under paragraph (2). The initial report shall in- 
clude an interim evaluation of the effectiveness of the initia- 
tives carried out with grants awarded under this section and 

June 9, 2010 



489 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4201 



a recommendation regarding whether funding for expanding or 
extending the initiatives should be extended beyond January 1, 
2016. 

(4) Final report. — Not later than July 1, 2016, the Sec- 
retary shall submit to Congress a final report on the program 
that includes the results of the independent assessment re- 
quired under paragraph (1), together with recommendations 
for such legislation and administrative action as the Secretary 
determines appropriate. 

(e) No Effect on Eligibility for, or Amount of, Medicaid 
or Other Benefits. — Any incentives provided to a Medicaid bene- 
ficiary participating in a program described in subsection (a)(3) 
shall not be taken into account for purposes of determining the 
beneficiary's eligibility for, or amount of, benefits under the Med- 
icaid program or any program funded in whole or in part with Fed- 
eral funds. 

(f) Funding. — Out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
appropriated, there are appropriated for the 5-year period begin- 
ning on January 1, 2011, $100,000,000 to the Secretary to carry out 
this section. Amounts appropriated under this subsection shall re- 
main available until expended. 

(g) Definitions. — In this section: 

(1) Medicaid beneficiary. — The term "Medicaid bene- 
ficiary" means an individual who is eligible for medical assist- 
ance under a State plan or waiver under title XIX of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) and is enrolled in such 
plan or waiver. 

(2) State. — The term "State" has the meaning given that 
term for purposes of title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396 et seq.). 

Subtitle C — Creating Healthier 
C ommunities 

SEC. 4201 [42 U.S.C. 300u-13]. COMMUNITY TRANSFORMATION GRANTS. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices (referred to in this section as the "Secretary"), acting through 
the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (re- 
ferred to in this section as the "Director"), shall award competitive 
grants to State and local governmental agencies and community- 
based organizations for the implementation, evaluation, and dis- 
semination of evidence-based community preventive health activi- 
ties in order to reduce chronic disease rates, prevent the develop- 
ment of secondary conditions, address health disparities, and de- 
velop a stronger evidence-base of effective prevention program- 
ming, with not less than 20 percent of such grants being awarded 
to rural and frontier areas. [As revised by section 10403(1)~\ 

(b) Eligibility. — To be eligible to receive a grant under sub- 
section (a), an entity shall — 

(1) be— 

(A) a State governmental agency; 

(B) a local governmental agency; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4201 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



490 



(C) a national network of community-based organiza- 
tions; 

(D) a State or local non-profit organization; or 

(E) an Indian tribe; and 

(2) submit to the Director an application at such time, in 
such a manner, and containing such information as the Direc- 
tor may require, including a description of the program to be 
carried out under the grant; and 

(3) demonstrate a history or capacity, if funded, to develop 
relationships necessary to engage key stakeholders from mul- 
tiple sectors within and beyond health care and across a com- 
munity, such as healthy futures corps and health care pro- 
viders. 

(c) Use of Funds. — 

(1) In general. — An eligible entity shall use amounts re- 
ceived under a grant under this section to carry out programs 
described in this subsection. 

(2) Community transformation plan. — 

(A) In general. — An eligible entity that receives a 
grant under this section shall submit to the Director (for 
approval) a detailed plan that includes the policy, environ- 
mental, programmatic, and as appropriate infrastructure 
changes needed to promote healthy living and reduce dis- 
parities. 

(B) Activities. — Activities within the plan may focus 
on (but not be limited to) — 

(i) creating healthier school environments, includ- 
ing increasing healthy food options, physical activity 
opportunities, promotion of healthy lifestyle, emotional 
wellness, and prevention curricula, and activities to 
prevent chronic diseases; 

(ii) creating the infrastructure to support active 
living and access to nutritious foods in a safe environ- 
ment; 

(iii) developing and promoting programs targeting 
a variety of age levels to increase access to nutrition, 
physical activity and smoking cessation, improve social 
and emotional wellness, enhance safety in a commu- 
nity, or address any other chronic disease priority area 
identified by the grantee; 

(iv) assessing and implementing worksite wellness 
programming and incentives; 

(v) working to highlight healthy options at res- 
taurants and other food venues; 

(vi) prioritizing strategies to reduce racial and eth- 
nic disparities, including social, economic, and geo- 
graphic determinants of health; and 

(vii) addressing special populations needs, includ- 
ing all age groups and individuals with disabilities, 
and individuals in urban, rural, and frontier areas. 
[As revised by section 10403(2)1 

(3) Community-based prevention health activities. — 

(A) In general. — An eligible entity shall use amounts 
received under a grant under this section to implement a 

June 9, 2010 



491 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4201 



variety of programs, policies, and infrastructure improve- 
ments to promote healthier lifestyles. 

(B) Activities. — An eligible entity shall implement ac- 
tivities detailed in the community transformation plan 
under paragraph (2). 

(C) In-kind support. — An eligible entity may provide 
in-kind resources such as staff, equipment, or office space 
in carrying out activities under this section. 

(4) Evaluation. — 

(A) In general. — An eligible entity shall use amounts 
provided under a grant under this section to conduct ac- 
tivities to measure changes in the prevalence of chronic 
disease risk factors among community members partici- 
pating in preventive health activities 

(B) Types of measures. — In carrying out subpara- 
graph (A), the eligible entity shall, with respect to resi- 
dents in the community, measure — 

(i) changes in weight; 

(ii) changes in proper nutrition; 

(iii) changes in physical activity; 

(iv) changes in tobacco use prevalence; 

(v) changes in emotional well-being and overall 
mental health; 

(vi) other factors using community-specific data 
from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey; 
and 

(vii) other factors as determined by the Secretary. 

(C) Reporting. — An eligible entity shall annually sub- 
mit to the Director a report containing an evaluation of ac- 
tivities carried out under the grant. 

(5) Dissemination. — A grantee under this section shall — 

(A) meet at least annually in regional or national 
meetings to discuss challenges, best practices, and lessons 
learned with respect to activities carried out under the 
grant; and 

(B) develop models for the replication of successful 
programs and activities and the mentoring of other eligible 
entities. 

(d) Training. — 

(1) In general. — The Director shall develop a program to 
provide training for eligible entities on effective strategies for 
the prevention and control of chronic disease and the link be- 
tween physical, emotional, and social well-being. 

(2) Community transformation plan. — The Director 
shall provide appropriate feedback and technical assistance to 
grantees to establish community transformation plans 

(3) Evaluation. — The Director shall provide a literature 
review and framework for the evaluation of programs con- 
ducted as part of the grant program under this section, in ad- 
dition to working with academic institutions or other entities 
with expertise in outcome evaluation. 

(e) Prohibition. — A grantee shall not use funds provided 
under a grant under this section to create video games or to carry 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4202 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



492 



out any other activities that may lead to higher rates of obesity or 
inactivity. 

(f) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are authorized 
to be appropriated to carry out this section, such sums as may be 
necessary for each of fiscal year 2010 through 2014. [As revised by 
section 10403(3)~\ 

SEC. 4202 [42 U.S.C. 300u-14]. HEALTHY AGING, LIVING WELL; EVALUA- 
TION OF COMMUNITY-BASED PREVENTION AND 
WELLNESS PROGRAMS FOR MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES. 

(a) Healthy Aging, Living Well. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services (referred to in this section as the "Secretary"), acting 
through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, shall award grants to State or local health depart- 
ments and Indian tribes to carry out 5-year pilot programs to 
provide public health community interventions, screenings, and 
where necessary, clinical referrals for individuals who are be- 
tween 55 and 64 years of age. 

(2) Eligibility. — To be eligible to receive a grant under 
paragraph (1), an entity shall — 

(A) be— 

(i) a State health department; 

(ii) a local health department; or 

(iii) an Indian tribe; 

(B) submit to the Secretary an application at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
the Secretary may require including a description of the 
program to be carried out under the grant; 

(C) design a strategy for improving the health of the 
55-to-64 year-old population through community-based 
public health interventions; and 

(D) demonstrate the capacity, if funded, to develop the 
relationships necessary with relevant health agencies, 
health care providers, community-based organizations, and 
insurers to carry out the activities described in paragraph 

(3) , such relationships to include the identification of a 
community-based clinical partner, such as a community 
health center or rural health clinic. 

(3) Use of funds. — 

(A) In general. — A State or local health department 
shall use amounts received under a grant under this sub- 
section to carry out a program to provide the services de- 
scribed in this paragraph to individuals who are between 
55 and 64 years of age. 

(B) Public health interventions. — 

(i) In general. — In developing and implementing 
such activities, a grantee shall collaborate with the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the 
Administration on Aging, and relevant local agencies 
and organizations. 

(ii) Types of intervention activities. — Interven- 
tion activities conducted under this subparagraph may 
include efforts to improve nutrition, increase physical 
activity, reduce tobacco use and substance abuse, im- 

June 9, 2010 



493 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4202 



prove mental health, and promote healthy lifestyles 
among the target population. 

(C) Community preventive screenings. — 

(i) In general. — In addition to community-wide 
public health interventions, a State or local health de- 
partment shall use amounts received under a grant 
under this subsection to conduct ongoing health 
screening to identify risk factors for cardiovascular 
disease, cancer, stroke, and diabetes among individ- 
uals in both urban and rural areas who are between 
55 and 64 years of age. 

(ii) Types of screening activities. — Screening 
activities conducted under this subparagraph may in- 
clude — 

(I) mental health/behavioral health and sub- 
stance use disorders; 

(II) physical activity, smoking, and nutrition; 

and 

(III) any other measures deemed appropriate 
by the Secretary. 

(iii) Monitoring. — Grantees under this section 
shall maintain records of screening results under this 
subparagraph to establish the baseline data for moni- 
toring the targeted population 

(D) Clinical referral/treatment for chronic dis- 
eases. — 

(i) In general. — A State or local health depart- 
ment shall use amounts received under a grant under 
this subsection to ensure that individuals between 55 
and 64 years of age who are found to have chronic dis- 
ease risk factors through the screening activities de- 
scribed in subparagraph (C)(ii), receive clinical refer- 
ral/treatment for follow-up services to reduce such 
risk. 

(ii) Mechanism. — 

(I) Identification and determination of 
status. — With respect to each individual with risk 
factors for or having heart disease, stroke, diabe- 
tes, or any other condition for which such indi- 
vidual was screened under subparagraph (C), a 
grantee under this section shall determine wheth- 
er or not such individual is covered under any 
public or private health insurance program. 

(II) Insured individuals. — An individual de- 
termined to be covered under a health insurance 
program under subclause (I) shall be referred by 
the grantee to the existing providers under such 
program or, if such individual does not have a cur- 
rent provider, to a provider who is in-network 
with respect to the program involved. 

(III) Uninsured individuals. — With respect 
to an individual determined to be uninsured 
under subclause (I), the grantee's community- 
based clinical partner described in paragraph 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4202 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



494 



(4)(D) shall assist the individual in determining 
eligibility for available public coverage options and 
identify other appropriate community health care 
resources and assistance programs, 
(iii) Public health intervention program. — A 
State or local health department shall use amounts re- 
ceived under a grant under this subsection to enter 
into contracts with community health centers or rural 
health clinics and mental health and substance use 
disorder service providers to assist in the referral/ 
treatment of at risk patients to community resources 
for clinical follow-up and help determine eligibility for 
other public programs. 

(E) Grantee evaluation. — An eligible entity shall 
use amounts provided under a grant under this subsection 
to conduct activities to measure changes in the prevalence 
of chronic disease risk factors among participants. 

(4) Pilot program evaluation. — The Secretary shall con- 
duct an annual evaluation of the effectiveness of the pilot pro- 
gram under this subsection. In determining such effectiveness, 
the Secretary shall consider changes in the prevalence of un- 
controlled chronic disease risk factors among new Medicare en- 
rollees (or individuals nearing enrollment, including those who 
are 63 and 64 years of age) who reside in States or localities 
receiving grants under this section as compared with national 
and historical data for those States and localities for the same 
population. 

(5) Authorization of appropriations. — There are author- 
ized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, such sums 
as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014. 
(b) Evaluation and Plan for Community-based Prevention 

and Wellness Programs for Medicare Beneficiaries. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary shall conduct an evalua- 
tion of community-based prevention and wellness programs 
and develop a plan for promoting healthy lifestyles and chronic 
disease self-management for Medicare beneficiaries. 

(2) Medicare evaluation of prevention and wellness 
programs. — 

(A) In general. — The Secretary shall evaluate com- 
munity prevention and wellness programs including those 
that are sponsored by the Administration on Aging, are 
evidence-based, and have demonstrated potential to help 
Medicare beneficiaries (particularly beneficiaries that have 
attained 65 years of age) reduce their risk of disease, dis- 
ability, and injury by making healthy lifestyle choices, in- 
cluding exercise, diet, and self-management of chronic dis- 
eases. 

(B) Evaluation. — The evaluation under subparagraph 
(A) shall consist of the following: 

(i) Evidence review. — The Secretary shall review 
available evidence, literature, best practices, and re- 
sources that are relevant to programs that promote 
healthy lifestyles and reduce risk factors for the Medi- 
care population. The Secretary may determine the 

June 9, 2010 



495 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4202 



scope of the evidence review and such issues to be con- 
sidered, which shall include, at a minimum — 

(I) physical activity, nutrition, and obesity; 

(II) falls; 

(III) chronic disease self-management; and 

(IV) mental health. 

(ii) Independent evaluation of evidence-based 

COMMUNITY PREVENTION AND WELLNESS PROGRAMS. — 

The Administrator of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Med- 
icaid Services, in consultation with the Assistant Sec- 
retary for Aging, shall, to the extent feasible and prac- 
ticable, conduct an evaluation of existing community 
prevention and wellness programs that are sponsored 
by the Administration on Aging to assess the extent to 
which Medicare beneficiaries who participate in such 
programs — 

(I) reduce their health risks, improve their 
health outcomes, and adopt and maintain healthy 
behaviors; 

(II) improve their ability to manage their 
chronic conditions; and 

(III) reduce their utilization of health services 
and associated costs under the Medicare program 
for conditions that are amenable to improvement 
under such programs. 

(3) Report— Not later than September 30, 2013, the Sec- 
retary shall submit to Congress a report that includes — 

(A) recommendations for such legislation and adminis- 
trative action as the Secretary determines appropriate to 
promote healthy lifestyles and chronic disease self-man- 
agement for Medicare beneficiaries; 

(B) any relevant findings relating to the evidence re- 
view under paragraph (2)(B)(i); and 

(C) the results of the evaluation under paragraph 
(2XBXii). 

(4) Funding. — For purposes of carrying out this sub- 
section, the Secretary shall provide for the transfer, from the 
Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under section 1817 of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i) and the Federal Sup- 
plemental Medical Insurance Trust Fund under section 1841 of 
such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395t), in such proportion as the Secretary 
determines appropriate, of $50,000,000 to the Centers for 
Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services Program Management Account. 
Amounts transferred under the preceding sentence shall re- 
main available until expended. 

(5) Administration. — Chapter 35 of title 44, United States 
Code shall not apply to the this subsection. 

(6) Medicare beneficiary. — In this subsection, the term 
"Medicare beneficiary" means an individual who is entitled to 
benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act 
and enrolled under part B of such title. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4203 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



496 



SEC. 4203. REMOVING BARRIERS AND IMPROVING ACCESS TO 
WELLNESS FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES. 

Title V of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 791 et seq.) 
is amended by adding at the end of the following: 

"SEC. 510 [29 U.S.C. 794Q. ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS FOR AC- 
CESSIBLE MEDICAL DIAGNOSTIC EQUIPMENT. 

"(a) Standards. — Not later than 24 months after the date of 
enactment of the Affordable Health Choices Act, the Architectural 
and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board shall, in consulta- 
tion with the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, 
promulgate regulatory standards in accordance with the Adminis- 
trative Procedure Act (2 U.S.C. 551 et seq.) setting forth the min- 
imum technical criteria for medical diagnostic equipment used in 
(or in conjunction with) physician's offices, clinics, emergency 
rooms, hospitals, and other medical settings. The standards shall 
ensure that such equipment is accessible to, and usable by, individ- 
uals with accessibility needs, and shall allow independent entry to, 
use of, and exit from the equipment by such individuals to the 
maximum extent possible. 

"(b) Medical Diagnostic Equipment Covered. — The stand- 
ards issued under subsection (a) for medical diagnostic equipment 
shall apply to equipment that includes examination tables, exam- 
ination chairs (including chairs used for eye examinations or proce- 
dures, and dental examinations or procedures), weight scales, 
mammography equipment, x-ray machines, and other radiological 
equipment commonly used for diagnostic purposes by health profes- 
sionals. 

"(c) Review and Amendment. — The Architectural and Trans- 
portation Barriers Compliance Board, in consultation with the 
Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, shall periodi- 
cally review and, as appropriate, amend the standards in accord- 
ance with the Administrative Procedure Act (2 U.S.C. 551 et seq.).". 

SEC. 4204. IMMUNIZATIONS. 

(a) State Authority To Purchase Recommended Vaccines 
for Adults. — Section 317 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 247b) is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"(1) Authority to Purchase Recommended Vaccines for 
Adults. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary may negotiate and enter 
into contracts with manufacturers of vaccines for the purchase 
and delivery of vaccines for adults as provided for under sub- 
section (e). 

"(2) State purchase. — A State may obtain additional 
quantities of such adult vaccines (subject to amounts specified 
to the Secretary by the State in advance of negotiations) 
through the purchase of vaccines from manufacturers at the 
applicable price negotiated by the Secretary under this sub- 
section.". 

(b) Demonstration Program to Improve Immunization Cov- 
erage.— Section 317 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
247b), as amended by subsection (a), is further amended by adding 
at the end the following: 

"(m) Demonstration Program To Improve Immunization 
Coverage. — 

June 9, 2010 



497 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4204 



"(1) In general. — The Secretary, acting through the Direc- 
tor of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall es- 
tablish a demonstration program to award grants to States to 
improve the provision of recommended immunizations for chil- 
dren, adolescents, and adults through the use of evidence- 
based, population-based interventions for high-risk popu- 
lations. 

"(2) State plan. — To be eligible for a grant under para- 
graph (1), a State shall submit to the Secretary an application 
at such time, in such manner, and containing such information 
as the Secretary may require, including a State plan that de- 
scribes the interventions to be implemented under the grant 
and how such interventions match with local needs and capa- 
bilities, as determined through consultation with local authori- 
ties. 

"(3) Use of funds. — Funds received under a grant under 
this subsection shall be used to implement interventions that 
are recommended by the Task Force on Community Preventive 
Services (as established by the Secretary, acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) or 
other evidence-based interventions, including — 

"(A) providing immunization reminders or recalls for 
target populations of clients, patients, and consumers; 

"(B) educating targeted populations and health care 
providers concerning immunizations in combination with 
one or more other interventions; 

"(C) reducing out-of-pocket costs for families for vac- 
cines and their administration; 

"(D) carrying out immunization-promoting strategies 
for participants or clients of public programs, including as- 
sessments of immunization status, referrals to health care 
providers, education, provision of on-site immunizations, or 
incentives for immunization; 

"(E) providing for home visits that promote immuniza- 
tion through education, assessments of need, referrals, pro- 
vision of immunizations, or other services; 

"(F) providing reminders or recalls for immunization 
providers; 

"(G) conducting assessments of, and providing feed- 
back to, immunization providers; 

"(H) any combination of one or more interventions de- 
scribed in this paragraph; or 

"(I) immunization information systems to allow all 
States to have electronic databases for immunization 
records. 

"(4) Consideration. — In awarding grants under this sub- 
section, the Secretary shall consider any reviews or rec- 
ommendations of the Task Force on Community Preventive 
Services. 

"(5) Evaluation. — Not later than 3 years after the date on 
which a State receives a grant under this subsection, the State 
shall submit to the Secretary an evaluation of progress made 
toward improving immunization coverage rates among high- 
risk populations within the State. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4204 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



498 



"(6) Report to congress. — Not later than 4 years after 
the date of enactment of the Affordable Health Choices Act, the 
Secretary shall submit to Congress a report concerning the ef- 
fectiveness of the demonstration program established under 
this subsection together with recommendations on whether to 
continue and expand such program. 

"(7) Authorization of appropriations. — There is author- 
ized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, such sums 
as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2010 through 
2014.". 

(c) Reauthorization of Immunization Program. — Section 
317(j) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247b(j)) is 
amended — 

(1) in paragraph (1), by striking "for each of the fiscal 
years 1998 through 2005"; and 

(2) in paragraph (2), by striking "after October 1, 1997,". 

(d) Rule of Construction Regarding Access to Immuniza- 
tions. — Nothing in this section (including the amendments made 
by this section), or any other provision of this Act (including any 
amendments made by this Act) shall be construed to decrease chil- 
dren's access to immunizations. 

(e) GAO Study and Report on Medicare Beneficiary Ac- 
cess to Vaccines. — 

(1) Study. — The Comptroller General of the United States 
(in this section referred to as the "Comptroller General") shall 
conduct a study on the ability of Medicare beneficiaries who 
were 65 years of age or older to access routinely recommended 
vaccines covered under the prescription drug program under 
part D of title XVIII of the Social Security Act over the period 
since the establishment of such program. Such study shall in- 
clude the following: 

(A) An analysis and determination of — 

(i) the number of Medicare beneficiaries who were 
65 years of age or older and were eligible for a rou- 
tinely recommended vaccination that was covered 
under part D; 

(ii) the number of such beneficiaries who actually 
received a routinely recommended vaccination that 
was covered under part D; and 

(iii) any barriers to access by such beneficiaries to 
routinely recommended vaccinations that were covered 
under part D. 

(B) A summary of the findings and recommendations 
by government agencies, departments, and advisory bodies 
(as well as relevant professional organizations) on the im- 
pact of coverage under part D of routinely recommended 
adult immunizations for access to such immunizations by 
Medicare beneficiaries. 

(2) Report. — Not later than June 1, 2011, the Comptroller 
General shall submit to the appropriate committees of jurisdic- 
tion of the House of Representatives and the Senate a report 
containing the results of the study conducted under paragraph 
(1), together with recommendations for such legislation and ad- 
June 9, 2010 



499 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4205 



ministrative action as the Comptroller General determines ap- 
propriate. 

(3) Funding. — Out of any funds in the Treasury not other- 
wise appropriated, there are appropriated $1,000,000 for fiscal 
year 2010 to carry out this subsection. 

SEC. 4205. NUTRITION LABELING OF STANDARD MENU ITEMS AT 
CHAIN RESTAURANTS. 

(a) Technical Amendments. — Section 403(q)(5)(A) of the Fed- 
eral Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 343(q)(5)(A)) is 
amended — 

(1) in subitem (i), by inserting at the beginning "except as 
provided in clause (H)(ii)(III),"; and 

(2) in subitem (ii), by inserting at the beginning "except as 
provided in clause (H)(ii)(III),". 

(b) Labeling Requirements. — Section 403(q)(5) of the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 343(q)(5)) is amended by 
adding at the end the following: 

"(H) Restaurants, Retail Food Establishments, and Vend- 
ing Machines. — 

"(i) General requirements for restaurants and simi- 
lar retail food establishments. — Except for food described 
in subclause (vii), in the case of food that is a standard menu 
item that is offered for sale in a restaurant or similar retail 
food establishment that is part of a chain with 20 or more loca- 
tions doing business under the same name (regardless of the 
type of ownership of the locations) and offering for sale sub- 
stantially the same menu items, the restaurant or similar re- 
tail food establishment shall disclose the information described 
in subclauses (ii) and (hi). 

"(ii) Information required to be disclosed by res- 
taurants and retail food establishments. — Except as pro- 
vided in subclause (vii), the restaurant or similar retail food es- 
tablishment shall disclose in a clear and conspicuous manner — 
"(I)(aa) in a nutrient content disclosure statement ad- 
jacent to the name of the standard menu item, so as to be 
clearly associated with the standard menu item, on the 
menu listing the item for sale, the number of calories con- 
tained in the standard menu item, as usually prepared 
and offered for sale; and 

"(bb) a succinct statement concerning suggested daily 
caloric intake, as specified by the Secretary by regulation 
and posted prominently on the menu and designed to en- 
able the public to understand, in the context of a total 
daily diet, the significance of the caloric information that 
is provided on the menu; 

"(II)(aa) in a nutrient content disclosure statement ad- 
jacent to the name of the standard menu item, so as to be 
clearly associated with the standard menu item, on the 
menu board, including a drive-through menu board, the 
number of calories contained in the standard menu item, 
as usually prepared and offered for sale; and 

"(bb) a succinct statement concerning suggested daily 
caloric intake, as specified by the Secretary by regulation 
and posted prominently on the menu board, designed to 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4205 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



500 



enable the public to understand, in the context of a total 
daily diet, the significance of the nutrition information 
that is provided on the menu board; 

"(III) in a written form, available on the premises of the 
restaurant or similar retail establishment and to the consumer 
upon request, the nutrition information required under clauses 
(C) and (D) of subparagraph (1); and 

"(IV) on the menu or menu board, a prominent, clear, and 
conspicuous statement regarding the availability of the infor- 
mation described in item (III). 

"(hi) Self-service food and food on display. — Except as 
provided in subclause (vii), in the case of food sold at a salad 
bar, buffet line, cafeteria line, or similar self-service facility, 
and for self-service beverages or food that is on display and 
that is visible to customers, a restaurant or similar retail food 
establishment shall place adjacent to each food offered a sign 
that lists calories per displayed food item or per serving. 

"(iv) Reasonable basis. — For the purposes of this clause, 
a restaurant or similar retail food establishment shall have a 
reasonable basis for its nutrient content disclosures, including 
nutrient databases, cookbooks, laboratory analyses, and other 
reasonable means, as described in section 101.10 of title 21, 
Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation) or in 
a related guidance of the Food and Drug Administration. 

"(v) Menu variability and combination meals. — The 
Secretary shall establish by regulation standards for deter- 
mining and disclosing the nutrient content for standard menu 
items that come in different flavors, varieties, or combinations, 
but which are listed as a single menu item, such as soft drinks, 
ice cream, pizza, doughnuts, or children's combination meals, 
through means determined by the Secretary, including ranges, 
averages, or other methods. 

"(vi) Additional information. — If the Secretary deter- 
mines that a nutrient, other than a nutrient required under 
subclause (ii)(III), should be disclosed for the purpose of pro- 
viding information to assist consumers in maintaining healthy 
dietary practices, the Secretary may require, by regulation, dis- 
closure of such nutrient in the written form required under 
subclause (ii)(III). 

"(vii) NONAPPLICABILITY TO CERTAIN FOOD. — 

"(I) In general. — Subclauses (i) through (vi) do not 
apply to — 

"(aa) items that are not listed on a menu or menu 
board (such as condiments and other items placed on 
the table or counter for general use); 

"(bb) daily specials, temporary menu items ap- 
pearing on the menu for less than 60 days per cal- 
endar year, or custom orders; or 

"(cc) such other food that is part of a customary 
market test appearing on the menu for less than 90 
days, under terms and conditions established by the 
Secretary. 

June 9, 2010 



501 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4205 



"(II) Written forms. — Subparagraph (5)(C) shall 

apply to any regulations promulgated under subclauses 

(iiXIII) and (vi). 

"(viii) Vending machines. — 

"(I) In general. — In the case of an article of food sold 

from a vending machine that — 

"(aa) does not permit a prospective purchaser to 
examine the Nutrition Facts Panel before purchasing 
the article or does not otherwise provide visible nutri- 
tion information at the point of purchase; and 

"(bb) is operated by a person who is engaged in 
the business of owning or operating 20 or more vend- 
ing machines, 

the vending machine operator shall provide a sign in close 
proximity to each article of food or the selection button 
that includes a clear and conspicuous statement disclosing 
the number of calories contained in the article, 
"(ix) Voluntary provision of nutrition information. — 

"(I) In general. — An authorized official of any res- 
taurant or similar retail food establishment or vending 
machine operator not subject to the requirements of this 
clause may elect to be subject to the requirements of such 
clause, by registering biannually the name and address of 
such restaurant or similar retail food establishment or 
vending machine operator with the Secretary, as specified 
by the Secretary by regulation. 

"(II) Registration. — Within 120 days of enactment of 
this clause, the Secretary shall publish a notice in the Fed- 
eral Register specifying the terms and conditions for imple- 
mentation of item (I), pending promulgation of regulations. 

"(Ill) Rule of construction. — Nothing in this sub- 
clause shall be construed to authorize the Secretary to re- 
quire an application, review, or licensing process for any 
entity to register with the Secretary, as described in such 
item. 

"(x) Regulations. — 

"(I) Proposed regulation. — Not later than 1 year 
after the date of enactment of this clause, the Secretary 
shall promulgate proposed regulations to carry out this 
clause. 

"(II) Contents. — In promulgating regulations, the 
Secretary shall — 

"(aa) consider standardization of recipes and 
methods of preparation, reasonable variation in serv- 
ing size and formulation of menu items, space on 
menus and menu boards, inadvertent human error, 
training of food service workers, variations in ingredi- 
ents, and other factors, as the Secretary determines; 
and 

"(bb) specify the format and manner of the nutri- 
ent content disclosure requirements under this sub- 
clause. 

"(Ill) Reporting. — The Secretary shall submit to the 
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4206 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



502 



the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce 
of the House of Representatives a quarterly report that de- 
scribes the Secretary's progress toward promulgating final 
regulations under this subparagraph. 

"(xi) Definition. — In this clause, the term 'menu' or 'menu 
board' means the primary writing of the restaurant or other 
similar retail food establishment from which a consumer 
makes an order selection." 

(c) National Uniformity. — Section 403A(a)(4) of the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 343-l(a)(4)) is amended 
by striking "except a requirement for nutrition labeling of food 
which is exempt under subclause (i) or (ii) of section 403(q)(5)(A)" 
and inserting "except that this paragraph does not apply to food 
that is offered for sale in a restaurant or similar retail food estab- 
lishment that is not part of a chain with 20 or more locations doing 
business under the same name (regardless of the type of ownership 
of the locations) and offering for sale substantially the same menu 
items unless such restaurant or similar retail food establishment 
complies with the voluntary provision of nutrition information re- 
quirements under section 403(q)(5)(H)(ix)". 

(d) Rule of Construction. — Nothing in the amendments 
made by this section shall be construed — 

(1) to preempt any provision of State or local law, unless 
such provision establishes or continues into effect nutrient con- 
tent disclosures of the type required under section 403(q)(5)(H) 
of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (as added by sub- 
section (b)) and is expressly preempted under subsection (a)(4) 
of such section; 

(2) to apply to any State or local requirement respecting a 
statement in the labeling of food that provides for a warning 
concerning the safety of the food or component of the food; or 

(3) except as provided in section 403(q)(5)(H)(ix) of the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (as added by subsection 
(b)), to apply to any restaurant or similar retail food establish- 
ment other than a restaurant or similar retail food establish- 
ment described in section 403(q)(5)(H)(i) of such Act. 

SEC. 4206. DEMONSTRATION PROJECT CONCERNING INDIVIDUALIZED 
WELLNESS PLAN. 

Section 330 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 245b) 
is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"(s) Demonstration Program for Individualized Wellness 
Plans. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall establish a pilot 
program to test the impact of providing at-risk populations 
who utilize community health centers funded under this sec- 
tion an individualized wellness plan that is designed to reduce 
risk factors for preventable conditions as identified by a com- 
prehensive risk-factor assessment. 

"(2) Agreements. — The Secretary shall enter into agree- 
ments with not more than 10 community health centers funded 
under this section to conduct activities under the pilot program 
under paragraph (1). 

"(3) Wellness plans. — 

June 9, 2010 



503 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4207 



"(A) In general. — An individualized wellness plan 
prepared under the pilot program under this subsection 
may include one or more of the following as appropriate to 
the individual's identified risk factors: 

"(i) Nutritional counseling. 

"(ii) A physical activity plan. 

"(hi) Alcohol and smoking cessation counseling 
and services. 

"(iv) Stress management. 

"(v) Dietary supplements that have health claims 
approved by the Secretary. 

"(vi) Compliance assistance provided by a commu- 
nity health center employee. 

"(B) Risk factors. — Wellness plan risk factors shall 
include — 

"(i) weight; 

"(ii) tobacco and alcohol use; 
"(hi) exercise rates; 
"(iv) nutritional status; and 
"(v) blood pressure. 
"(C) Comparisons. — Individualized wellness plans 
shall make comparisons between the individual involved 
and a control group of individuals with respect to the risk 
factors described in subparagraph (B). 
"(4) Authorization of appropriations. — There is author- 
ized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, such sums 
as may be necessary.". 

SEC. 4207. REASONABLE BREAK TIME FOR NURSING MOTHERS. 

Section 7 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 
207) is amended by adding at the end the following: 
"(r)(l) An employer shall provide — 

"(A) a reasonable break time for an employee to express 
breast milk for her nursing child for 1 year after the child's 
birth each time such employee has need to express the milk; 
and 

"(B) a place, other than a bathroom, that is shielded from 
view and free from intrusion from coworkers and the public, 
which may be used by an employee to express breast milk. 
"(2) An employer shall not be required to compensate an em- 
ployee receiving reasonable break time under paragraph (1) for any 
work time spent for such purpose. 

"(3) An employer that employs less than 50 employees shall not 
be subject to the requirements of this subsection, if such require- 
ments would impose an undue hardship by causing the employer 
significant difficulty or expense when considered in relation to the 
size, financial resources, nature, or structure of the employer's 
business. 

"(4) Nothing in this subsection shall preempt a State law that 
provides greater protections to employees than the protections pro- 
vided for under this subsection.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4301 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



504 



Subtitle D — Support for Prevention and 
Public Health Innovation 

SEC. 4301 [42 U.S.C. 300u-15]. RESEARCH ON OPTIMIZING THE DELIV- 
ERY OF PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICES. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices (referred to in this section as the "Secretary"), acting through 
the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
shall provide funding for research in the area of public health serv- 
ices and systems. 

(b) Requirements of Research. — Research supported under 
this section shall include — 

(1) examining evidence-based practices relating to preven- 
tion, with a particular focus on high priority areas as identified 
by the Secretary in the National Prevention Strategy or 
Healthy People 2020, and including comparing community- 
based public health interventions in terms of effectiveness and 
cost; 

(2) analyzing the translation of interventions from aca- 
demic settings to real world settings; and 

(3) identifying effective strategies for organizing, financing, 
or delivering public health services in real world community 
settings, including comparing State and local health depart- 
ment structures and systems in terms of effectiveness and cost. 

(c) Existing Partnerships. — Research supported under this 
section shall be coordinated with the Community Preventive Serv- 
ices Task Force and carried out by building on existing partner- 
ships within the Federal Government while also considering initia- 
tives at the State and local levels and in the private sector. 

(d) Annual Report. — The Secretary shall, on an annual basis, 
submit to Congress a report concerning the activities and findings 
with respect to research supported under this section. 

SEC. 4302. UNDERSTANDING HEALTH DISPARITIES: DATA COLLEC- 
TION AND ANALYSIS. 

(a) Uniform Categories and Collection Requirements. — 
The Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 201 et seq.) is amended 
by adding at the end the following: 

"TITLE XXXI— DATA COLLECTION, 
ANALYSIS, AND QUALITY 

"SEC. 3101 [42 U.S.C. 300k]. DATA COLLECTION, ANALYSIS, AND QUAL- 
ITY. 

"(a) Data Collection. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall ensure that, by not 
later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this title, any 
federally conducted or supported health care or public health 
program, activity or survey (including Current Population Sur- 
veys and American Community Surveys conducted by the Bu- 
reau of Labor Statistics and the Bureau of the Census) collects 
and reports, to the extent practicable — 

June 9, 2010 



505 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4302X3101 PHSA 



"(A) data on race, ethnicity, sex, primary language, 
and disability status for applicants, recipients, or partici- 
pants; 

"(B) data at the smallest geographic level such as 
State, local, or institutional levels if such data can be ag- 
gregated; 

"(C) sufficient data to generate statistically reliable es- 
timates by racial, ethnic, sex, primary language, and dis- 
ability status subgroups for applicants, recipients or par- 
ticipants using, if needed, statistical oversamples of these 
subpopulations; and 

"(D) any other demographic data as deemed appro- 
priate by the Secretary regarding health disparities. 
"(2) Collection standards. — In collecting data described 
in paragraph (1), the Secretary or designee shall — 

"(A) use Office of Management and Budget standards, 
at a minimum, for race and ethnicity measures; 

"(B) develop standards for the measurement of sex, 
primary language, and disability status; 

"(C) develop standards for the collection of data de- 
scribed in paragraph (1) that, at a minimum — 

"(i) collects self-reported data by the applicant, re- 
cipient, or participant; and 

"(ii) collects data from a parent or legal guardian 

if the applicant, recipient, or participant is a minor or 

legally incapacitated; 

"(D) survey health care providers and establish other 
procedures in order to assess access to care and treatment 
for individuals with disabilities and to identify — 

"(i) locations where individuals with disabilities 
access primary, acute (including intensive), and long- 
term care; 

"(ii) the number of providers with accessible facili- 
ties and equipment to meet the needs of the individ- 
uals with disabilities, including medical diagnostic 
equipment that meets the minimum technical criteria 
set forth in section 510 of the Rehabilitation Act of 
1973; and 

"(hi) the number of employees of health care pro- 
viders trained in disability awareness and patient care 
of individuals with disabilities; and 
"(E) require that any reporting requirement imposed 
for purposes of measuring quality under any ongoing or 
federally conducted or supported health care or public 
health program, activity, or survey includes requirements 
for the collection of data on individuals receiving health 
care items or services under such programs activities by 
race, ethnicity, sex, primary language, and disability sta- 
tus. 

"(3) Data management. — In collecting data described in 
paragraph (1), the Secretary, acting through the National Co- 
ordinator for Health Information Technology shall — 

"(A) develop national standards for the management of 

data collected; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4302X3101 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



506 



"(B) develop interoperability and security systems for 
data management. 
"(b) Data Analysis. — 

"(1) In general. — For each federally conducted or sup- 
ported health care or public health program or activity, the 
Secretary shall analyze data collected under paragraph (a) to 
detect and monitor trends in health disparities (as defined for 
purposes of section 485E) at the Federal and State levels. 
"(c) Data Reporting and Dissemination. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall make the analyses 
described in (b) available to — 

"(A) the Office of Minority Health; 
"(B) the National Center on Minority Health and 
Health Disparities; 

"(C) the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 
"(D) the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 
"(E) the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services; 
"(F) the Indian Health Service and epidemiology cen- 
ters funded under the Indian Health Care Improvement 
Act' 

' "(G) the Office of Rural health; 

"(H) other agencies within the Department of Health 
and Human Services; and 

"(I) other entities as determined appropriate by the 
Secretary. 

"(2) Reporting of data. — The Secretary shall report data 
and analyses described in (a) and (b) through — 

"(A) public postings on the Internet websites of the De- 
partment of Health and Human Services; and 

"(B) any other reporting or dissemination mechanisms 
determined appropriate by the Secretary. 
"(3) Availability of data. — The Secretary may make data 
described in (a) and (b) available for additional research, anal- 
yses, and dissemination to other Federal agencies, non-govern- 
mental entities, and the public, in accordance with any Federal 
agency's data user agreements. 

"(d) Limitations on Use of Data. — Nothing in this section 
shall be construed to permit the use of information collected under 
this section in a manner that would adversely affect any individual. 
"(e) Protection and Sharing of Data. — 

"(1) Privacy and other safeguards. — The Secretary 
shall ensure (through the promulgation of regulations or other- 
wise) that — 

"(A) all data collected pursuant to subsection (a) is 
protected — 

"(i) under privacy protections that are at least as 
broad as those that the Secretary applies to other 
health data under the regulations promulgated under 
section 264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-191; 110 
Stat. 2033); and 

"(ii) from all inappropriate internal use by any en- 
tity that collects, stores, or receives the data, including 
use of such data in determinations of eligibility (or 

June 9, 2010 



507 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4302 



continued eligibility) in health plans, and from other 
inappropriate uses, as denned by the Secretary; and 
"(B) all appropriate information security safeguards 

are used in the collection, analysis, and sharing of data 

collected pursuant to subsection (a). 

"(2) Data sharing. — The Secretary shall establish proce- 
dures for sharing data collected pursuant to subsection (a), 
measures relating to such data, and analyses of such data, 
with other relevant Federal and State agencies including the 
agencies, centers, and entities within the Department of 
Health and Human Services specified in subsection (c)(1).. 
"(f) Data on Rural Underserved Populations. — The Sec- 
retary shall ensure that any data collected in accordance with this 
section regarding racial and ethnic minority groups are also col- 
lected regarding underserved rural and frontier populations. 

"(g) Authorization of Appropriations. — For the purpose of 
carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated 
such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2010 
through 2014. 

"(h) Requirement for Implementation. — Notwithstanding 
any other provision of this section, data may not be collected under 
this section unless funds are directly appropriated for such purpose 
in an appropriations Act. 

"(i) Consultation. — The Secretary shall consult with the Di- 
rector of the Office of Personnel Management, the Secretary of De- 
fense, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, the Director of the Bureau 
of the Census, the Commissioner of Social Security, and the head 
of other appropriate Federal agencies in carrying out this section.". 

(b) Addressing Health Care Disparities in Medicaid and 
CHIP.— 

(1) Standardized collection requirements included in 
state plans. — 

(A) Medicaid. — Section 1902(a) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)), as amended by section 2001(d), 
is amended — 

(i) in paragraph 4), by striking "and" at the end; 

(ii) in paragraph (75), by striking the period at the 
end and inserting "; and"; and 

(iii) by inserting after paragraph (75) the following 
new paragraph: 

"(76) provide that any data collected under the State plan 
meets the requirements of section 3101 of the Public Health 
Service Act " 

(B) CHIP.— Section 2108(e) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1397hh(e)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph: 

"(7) Data collected and reported in accordance with section 
3101 of the Public Health Service Act, with respect to individ- 
uals enrolled in the State child health plan (and, in the case 
of enrollees under 19 years of age, their parents or legal guard- 
ians), including data regarding the primary language of such 
individuals, parents, and legal guardians.". 

(2) Extending medicare requirement to address 
health disparities data collection to medicaid and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4302U946 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



508 



chip.— Title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et 
seq.), as amended by section 2703 is amended by adding at the 
end the following new section: 

"SEC. 1946 [42 U.S.C. 1396w-5]. ADDRESSING HEALTH CARE DISPARI- 
TIES. 

"(a) Evaluating Data Collection Approaches. — The Sec- 
retary shall evaluate approaches for the collection of data under 
this title and title XXI, to be performed in conjunction with existing 
quality reporting requirements and programs under this title and 
title XXI, that allow for the ongoing, accurate, and timely collection 
and evaluation of data on disparities in health care services and 
performance on the basis of race, ethnicity, sex, primary language, 
and disability status. In conducting such evaluation, the Secretary 
shall consider the following objectives: 
"(1) Protecting patient privacy. 

"(2) Minimizing the administrative burdens of data collec- 
tion and reporting on States, providers, and health plans par- 
ticipating under this title or title XXI. 

"(3) Improving program data under this title and title XXI 
on race, ethnicity, sex, primary language, and disability status. 
"(b) Reports to Congress. — 

"(1) Report on evaluation. — Not later than 18 months 
after the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary 
shall submit to Congress a report on the evaluation conducted 
under subsection (a). Such report shall, taking into consider- 
ation the results of such evaluation — 

"(A) identify approaches (including defining meth- 
odologies) for identifying and collecting and evaluating 
data on health care disparities on the basis of race, eth- 
nicity, sex, primary language, and disability status for the 
programs under this title and title XXI; and 

"(B) include recommendations on the most effective 
strategies and approaches to reporting HEDIS quality 
measures as required under section 1852(e)(3) and other 
nationally recognized quality performance measures, as 
appropriate, on such bases. 

"(2) Reports on data analyses. — Not later than 4 years 
after the date of the enactment of this section, and 4 years 
thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report 
that includes recommendations for improving the identification 
of health care disparities for beneficiaries under this title and 
under title XXI based on analyses of the data collected under 
subsection (c). 

"(c) Implementing Effective Approaches. — Not later than 24 
months after the date of the enactment of this section, the Sec- 
retary shall implement the approaches identified in the report sub- 
mitted under subsection (b)(1) for the ongoing, accurate, and timely 
collection and evaluation of data on health care disparities on the 
basis of race, ethnicity, sex, primary language, and disability sta- 
tus.". 



509 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4303\399MM-1 PHSA 



SEC. 4303. CDC AND EMPLOYER-BASED WELLNESS PROGRAMS. 

Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 241 et 
seq.), by section 4102, is further amended by adding at the end the 
following: 

"PART U— EMPLOYER-BASED WELLNESS 
PROGRAM 

"SEC. 399MM [42 U.S.C. 2801J. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR EM- 
PLOYER-BASED WELLNESS PROGRAMS. 

"In order to expand the utilization of evidence-based preven- 
tion and health promotion approaches in the workplace, the Direc- 
tor shall — 

"(1) provide employers (including small, medium, and large 
employers, as determined by the Director) with technical as- 
sistance, consultation, tools, and other resources in evaluating 
such employers' employer-based wellness programs, includ- 
ing— 

"(A) measuring the participation and methods to in- 
crease participation of employees in such programs; 

"(B) developing standardized measures that assess pol- 
icy, environmental and systems changes necessary to have 
a positive health impact on employees' health behaviors, 
health outcomes, and health care expenditures; and 

"(C) evaluating such programs as they relate to 
changes in the health status of employees, the absenteeism 
of employees, the productivity of employees, the rate of 
workplace injury, and the medical costs incurred by em- 
ployees; and 

"(2) build evaluation capacity among workplace staff by 
training employers on how to evaluate employer-based 
wellness programs and ensuring evaluation resources, tech- 
nical assistance, and consultation are available to workplace 
staff as needed through such mechanisms as web portals, call 
centers, or other means. [As revised by section 10404~\ 

"SEC. 399MM-1 [42 U.S.C. 2801-1]. NATIONAL WORKSITE HEALTH POLI- 
CIES AND PROGRAMS STUDY. 

"(a) In General. — In order to assess, analyze, and monitor 
over time data about workplace policies and programs, and to de- 
velop instruments to assess and evaluate comprehensive workplace 
chronic disease prevention and health promotion programs, policies 
and practices, not later than 2 years after the date of enactment 
of this part, and at regular intervals (to be determined by the Di- 
rector) thereafter, the Director shall conduct a national worksite 
health policies and programs survey to assess employer-based 
health policies and programs. 

"(b) Report. — Upon the completion of each study under sub- 
section (a), the Director shall submit to Congress a report that in- 
cludes the recommendations of the Director for the implementation 
of effective employer-based health policies and programs. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4303\399MM-2 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



510 



"SEC. 399MM-2 [42 U.S.C. 2801-2]. PRIORITIZATION OF EVALUATION BY 
SECRETARY. 

"The Secretary shall evaluate, in accordance with this part, all 
programs funded through the Centers for Disease Control and Pre- 
vention before conducting such an evaluation of privately funded 
programs unless an entity with a privately funded wellness pro- 
gram requests such an evaluation. 

"SEC. 399MM-3 [42 U.S.C. 2801-3]. PROHIBITION OF FEDERAL WORK- 
PLACE WELLNESS REQUIREMENTS. 

"Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, any rec- 
ommendations, data, or assessments carried out under this part 
shall not be used to mandate requirements for workplace wellness 
programs.". 

SEC. 4304. EPIDEMIOLOGY-LABORATORY CAPACITY GRANTS. 

Title XXVIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300hh 
et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"Subtitle C— Strengthening Public Health 
Surveillance Systems 

"SEC. 2821 [42 U.S.C. 300hh-31]. EPIDEMIOLOGY-LABORATORY CAPAC- 
ITY GRANTS. 

"(a) In General. — Subject to the availability of appropriations, 
the Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Dis- 
ease Control and Prevention, shall establish an Epidemiology and 
Laboratory Capacity Grant Program to award grants to State 
health departments as well as local health departments and tribal 
jurisdictions that meet such criteria as the Director determines ap- 
propriate. Academic centers that assist State and eligible local and 
tribal health departments may also be eligible for funding under 
this section as the Director determines appropriate. Grants shall be 
awarded under this section to assist public health agencies in im- 
proving surveillance for, and response to, infectious diseases and 
other conditions of public health importance by — 

"(1) strengthening epidemiologic capacity to identify and 
monitor the occurrence of infectious diseases and other condi- 
tions of public health importance; 

"(2) enhancing laboratory practice as well as systems to re- 
port test orders and results electronically; 

"(3) improving information systems including developing 
and maintaining an information exchange using national 
guidelines and complying with capacities and functions deter- 
mined by an advisory council established and appointed by the 
Director; and 

"(4) developing and implementing prevention and control 
strategies. 

"(b) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are author- 
ized to be appropriated to carry out this section $190,000,000 for 
each of fiscal years 2010 through 2013, of which — 

"(1) not less than $95,000,000 shall be made available each 

such fiscal year for activities under paragraphs (1) and (4) of 

subsection (a); 

June 9, 2010 



511 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4305X409J PHSA 



"(2) not less than $60,000,000 shall be made available each 
such fiscal year for activities under subsection (a)(3); and 

"(3) not less than $32,000,000 shall be made available each 
such fiscal year for activities under subsection (a)(2).". 

SEC. 4305. ADVANCING RESEARCH AND TREATMENT FOR PAIN CARE 
MANAGEMENT. 

(a) Institute of Medicine Conference on Pain. — 

(1) Convening. — Not later than 1 year after funds are ap- 
propriated to carry out this subsection, the Secretary of Health 
and Human Services shall seek to enter into an agreement 
with the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies to 
convene a Conference on Pain (in this subsection referred to as 
"the Conference"). 

(2) Purposes. — The purposes of the Conference shall be 

to— 

(A) increase the recognition of pain as a significant 
public health problem in the United States; 

(B) evaluate the adequacy of assessment, diagnosis, 
treatment, and management of acute and chronic pain in 
the general population, and in identified racial, ethnic, 
gender, age, and other demographic groups that may be 
disproportionately affected by inadequacies in the assess- 
ment, diagnosis, treatment, and management of pain; 

(C) identify barriers to appropriate pain care; 

(D) establish an agenda for action in both the public 
and private sectors that will reduce such barriers and sig- 
nificantly improve the state of pain care research, edu- 
cation, and clinical care in the United States. 

(3) Other appropriate entity. — If the Institute of Medi- 
cine declines to enter into an agreement under paragraph (1), 
the Secretary of Health and Human Services may enter into 
such agreement with another appropriate entity. 

(4) Report. — A report summarizing the Conference's find- 
ings and recommendations shall be submitted to the Congress 
not later than June 30, 2011. 

(5) Authorization of appropriations. — For the purpose 
of carrying out this subsection, there is authorized to be appro- 
priated such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 
2010 and 2011. 

(b) Pain Research at National Institutes of Health. — Part 
B of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 284 et seq.) 
is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"SEC. 409J [42 U.S.C. 284q]. PAIN RESEARCH. 

"(a) Research Initiatives. — 

"(1) In general. — The Director of NIH is encouraged to 
continue and expand, through the Pain Consortium, an aggres- 
sive program of basic and clinical research on the causes of and 
potential treatments for pain. 

"(2) Annual recommendations. — Not less than annually, 
the Pain Consortium, in consultation with the Division of Pro- 
gram Coordination, Planning, and Strategic Initiatives, shall 
develop and submit to the Director of NIH recommendations 
on appropriate pain research initiatives that could be under- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4305\409J PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



512 



taken with funds reserved under section 402A(c)(l) for the 
Common Fund or otherwise available for such initiatives. 

"(3) Definition. — In this subsection, the term 'Pain Con- 
sortium' means the Pain Consortium of the National Institutes 
of Health or a similar trans-National Institutes of Health co- 
ordinating entity designated by the Secretary for purposes of 
this subsection. 

"(b) Interagency Pain Research Coordinating Com- 
mittee. — 

"(1) Establishment. — The Secretary shall establish not 
later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this section 
and as necessary maintain a committee, to be known as the 
Interagency Pain Research Coordinating Committee (in this 
section referred to as the 'Committee'), to coordinate all efforts 
within the Department of Health and Human Services and 
other Federal agencies that relate to pain research. 
"(2) Membership. — 

"(A) In general. — The Committee shall be composed 
of the following voting members: 

"(i) Not more than 7 voting Federal representa- 
tives appoint by the Secretary from agencies that con- 
duct pain care research and treatment. 

"(ii) 12 additional voting members appointed 
under subparagraph (B). 

"(B) Additional members. — The Committee shall in- 
clude additional voting members appointed by the Sec- 
retary as follows: 

"(i) 6 non-Federal members shall be appointed 
from among scientists, physicians, and other health 
professionals. 

"(ii) 6 members shall be appointed from members 
of the general public, who are representatives of lead- 
ing research, advocacy, and service organizations for 
individuals with pain-related conditions. 
"(C) Nonvoting members. — The Committee shall in- 
clude such nonvoting members as the Secretary deter- 
mines to be appropriate. 

"(3) Chairperson. — The voting members of the Committee 
shall select a chairperson from among such members. The se- 
lection of a chairperson shall be subject to the approval of the 
Director of NIH. 

"(4) Meetings. — The Committee shall meet at the call of 
the chairperson of the Committee or upon the request of the 
Director of NIH, but in no case less often than once each year. 
"(5) Duties. — The Committee shall — 

"(A) develop a summary of advances in pain care re- 
search supported or conducted by the Federal agencies rel- 
evant to the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of pain 
and diseases and disorders associated with pain; 

"(B) identify critical gaps in basic and clinical research 
on the symptoms and causes of pain; 

"(C) make recommendations to ensure that the activi- 
ties of the National Institutes of Health and other Federal 
agencies are free of unnecessary duplication of effort; 

June 9, 2010 



513 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 4306 



"(D) make recommendations on how best to dissemi- 
nate information on pain care; and 

"(E) make recommendations on how to expand part- 
nerships between public entities and private entities to ex- 
pand collaborative, cross-cutting research. 
"(6) Review. — The Secretary shall review the necessity of 
the Committee at least once every 2 years.", 
(c) Pain Care Education and Training. — Part D of title VII 
of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 294 et seq.) is amended 
by adding at the end the following new section: 

"SEC. 759 [42 U.S.C. 294i]. PROGRAM FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING 
IN PAIN CARE. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary may make awards of grants, 
cooperative agreements, and contracts to health professions 
schools, hospices, and other public and private entities for the de- 
velopment and implementation of programs to provide education 
and training to health care professionals in pain care. 

"(b) Certain Topics. — An award may be made under sub- 
section (a) only if the applicant for the award agrees that the pro- 
gram carried out with the award will include information and edu- 
cation on — 

"(1) recognized means for assessing, diagnosing, treating, 
and managing pain and related signs and symptoms, including 
the medically appropriate use of controlled substances; 

"(2) applicable laws, regulations, rules, and policies on con- 
trolled substances, including the degree to which misconcep- 
tions and concerns regarding such laws, regulations, rules, and 
policies, or the enforcement thereof, may create barriers to pa- 
tient access to appropriate and effective pain care; 

"(3) interdisciplinary approaches to the delivery of pain 
care, including delivery through specialized centers providing 
comprehensive pain care treatment expertise; 

"(4) cultural, linguistic, literacy, geographic, and other bar- 
riers to care in underserved populations; and 

"(5) recent findings, developments, and improvements in 
the provision of pain care. 

"(c) Evaluation of Programs. — The Secretary shall (directly 
or through grants or contracts) provide for the evaluation of pro- 
grams implemented under subsection (a) in order to determine the 
effect of such programs on knowledge and practice of pain care. 

"(d) Pain Care Defined. — For purposes of this section the 
term 'pain care' means the assessment, diagnosis, treatment, or 
management of acute or chronic pain regardless of causation or 
body location. 

"(e) Authorization of Appropriations. — There is authorized 
to be appropriated to carry out this section, such sums as may be 
necessary for each of the fiscal years 2010 through 2012. Amounts 
appropriated under this subsection shall remain available until ex- 
pended.". 

SEC. 4306. FUNDING FOR CHILDHOOD OBESITY DEMONSTRATION 
PROJECT. 

Section 1139A(e)(8) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1320b-9a(e)(8)) is amended to read as follows: 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 4401 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



514 



"(8) Appropriation. — Out of any funds in the Treasury not 
otherwise appropriated, there is appropriated to carry out this 
subsection, $25,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2010 
through 2014.". 

Subtitle E — Miscellaneous Provisions 

[SEC. 4401. SENSE OF THE SENATE CONCERNING CBO SCORING.] 

[Stricken by section 10405; subsequent section not redesig- 
nated] 

SEC. 4402. EFFECTIVENESS OF FEDERAL HEALTH AND WELLNESS INI- 
TIATIVES. 

To determine whether existing Federal health and wellness 
initiatives are effective in achieving their stated goals, the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services shall — 

(1) conduct an evaluation of such programs as they relate 
to changes in health status of the American public and specifi- 
cally on the health status of the Federal workforce, including 
absenteeism of employees, the productivity of employees, the 
rate of workplace injury, and the medical costs incurred by em- 
ployees, and health conditions, including workplace fitness, 
healthy food and beverages, and incentives in the Federal Em- 
ployee Health Benefits Program; and 

(2) submit to Congress a report concerning such evalua- 
tion, which shall include conclusions concerning the reasons 
that such existing programs have proven successful or not suc- 
cessful and what factors contributed to such conclusions. 



515 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5002 



TITLE V— HEALTH CARE WORKFORCE 
Subtitle A — Purpose and Definitions 

SEC. 5001. PURPOSE. 

The purpose of this title is to improve access to and the deliv- 
ery of health care services for all individuals, particularly low in- 
come, underserved, uninsured, minority, health disparity, and rural 
populations by — 

(1) gathering and assessing comprehensive data in order 
for the health care workforce to meet the health care needs of 
individuals, including research on the supply, demand, dis- 
tribution, diversity, and skills needs of the health care work- 
force; 

(2) increasing the supply of a qualified health care work- 
force to improve access to and the delivery of health care serv- 
ices for all individuals; 

(3) enhancing health care workforce education and train- 
ing to improve access to and the delivery of health care serv- 
ices for all individuals; and 

(4) providing support to the existing health care workforce 
to improve access to and the delivery of health care services for 
all individuals. 

SEC. 5002 [42 U.S.C. 294q note]. DEFINITIONS. 

(a) This Title. — In this title: 

(1) Allied health professional. — The term "allied 
health professional" means an allied health professional as de- 
fined in section 799B(5) of the Public Heath Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 295p(5)) who— 

(A) has graduated and received an allied health pro- 
fessions degree or certificate from an institution of higher 
education; and 

(B) is employed with a Federal, State, local or tribal 
public health agency, or in a setting where patients might 
require health care services, including acute care facilities, 
ambulatory care facilities, personal residences, and other 
settings located in health professional shortage areas, 
medically underserved areas, or medically underserved 
populations, as recognized by the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services. 

(2) Health care career pathway. — The term "healthcare 
career pathway" means a rigorous, engaging, and high quality 
set of courses and services that — 

(A) includes an articulated sequence of academic and 
career courses, including 21st century skills; 

(B) is aligned with the needs of healthcare industries 
in a region or State; 

(C) prepares students for entry into the full range of 
postsecondary education options, including registered ap- 
prenticeships, and careers; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



516 



(D) provides academic and career counseling in stu- 
dent-to-counselor ratios that allow students to make in- 
formed decisions about academic and career options; 

(E) meets State academic standards, State require- 
ments for secondary school graduation and is aligned with 
requirements for entry into postsecondary education, and 
applicable industry standards; and 

(F) leads to 2 or more credentials, including — 

(i) a secondary school diploma; and 

(ii) a postsecondary degree, an apprenticeship or 
other occupational certification, a certificate, or a li- 
cense. 

(3) Institution of higher education. — The term "institu- 
tion of higher education" has the meaning given the term in 
sections 101 and 102 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1001 and 1002). 

(4) Low INCOME individual, state workforce invest- 
ment BOARD, AND LOCAL WORKFORCE INVESTMENT BOARD. — 

(A) Low-income individual. — The term "low-income 
individual" has the meaning given that term in section 101 
of the Workforce investment Act of 1998 (29 U.S.C. 2801). 

(B) State workforce investment board; local 
workforce investment board. — The terms "State work- 
force investment board" and "local workforce investment 
board", refer to a State workforce investment board estab- 
lished under section 111 of the Workforce Investment Act 
of 1998 (29 U.S.C. 2821) and a local workforce investment 
board established under section 117 of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
2832), respectively. 

(5) Postsecondary education. — The term "postsecondary 
education" means — 

(A) a 4-year program of instruction, or not less than 
a 1-year program of instruction that is acceptable for cred- 
it toward an associate or a baccalaureate degree, offered by 
an institution of higher education; or 

(B) a certificate or registered apprenticeship program 
at the postsecondary level offered by an institution of high- 
er education or a non-profit educational institution. 

(6) Registered apprenticeship program. — The term "reg- 
istered apprenticeship program" means an industry skills 
training program at the postsecondary level that combines 
technical and theoretical training through structure on the job 
learning with related instruction (in a classroom or through 
distance learning) while an individual is employed, working 
under the direction of qualified personnel or a mentor, and 
earning incremental wage increases aligned to enhance job pro- 
ficiency, resulting in the acquisition of a nationally recognized 
and portable certificate, under a plan approved by the Office 
of Apprenticeship or a State agency recognized by the Depart- 
ment of Labor. 

(b) Title VII of the Public Health Service Act. — Section 
799B of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 295p) is amend- 
ed— 

(1) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the following: 

June 9, 2010 



517 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5002 



"(3) Physician assistant education program. — The term 
'physician assistant education program' means an educational 
program in a public or private institution in a State that — 

"(A) has as its objective the education of individuals 

who, upon completion of their studies in the program, be 

qualified to provide primary care medical services with the 

supervision of a physician; and 

"(B) is accredited by the Accreditation Review Com- 
mission on Education for the Physician Assistant."; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following: 

"(12) Area health education center. — The term 'area 
health education center' means a public or nonprofit private or- 
ganization that has a cooperative agreement or contract in ef- 
fect with an entity that has received an award under sub- 
section (a)(1) or (a)(2) of section 751, satisfies the requirements 
in section 751(d)(1), and has as one of its principal functions 
the operation of an area health education center. Appropriate 
organizations may include hospitals, health organizations with 
accredited primary care training programs, accredited physi- 
cian assistant educational programs associated with a college 
or university, and universities or colleges not operating a 
school of medicine or osteopathic medicine. 

"(13) Area health education center program. — The 
term 'area health education center program' means cooperative 
program consisting of an entity that has received an award 
under subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of section 751 for the purpose 
of planning, developing, operating, and evaluating an area 
health education center program and one or more area health 
education centers, which carries out the required activities de- 
scribed in section 751(c), satisfies the program requirements in 
such section, has as one of its principal functions identifying 
and implementing strategies and activities that address health 
care workforce needs in its service area, in coordination with 
the local workforce investment boards. 

"(14) Clinical social worker. — The term 'clinical social 
worker' has the meaning given the term in section 1861(hh)(l) 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(hh)(l)). 

"(15) Cultural competency. — The term 'cultural com- 
petency' shall be defined by the Secretary in a manner con- 
sistent with section 1707(d)(3). 

"(16) Direct care worker. — The term 'direct care worker' 
has the meaning given that term in the 2010 Standard Occu- 
pational Classifications of the Department of Labor for Home 
Health Aides [31-1011], Psychiatric Aides [31-1013], Nursing 
Assistants [31-1014], and Personal Care Aides [39-9021]. 

"(17) Federally qualified health center. — The term 
'Federally qualified health center' has the meaning given that 
term in section 1861(aa) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395x(aa)). 

"(18) Frontier health professional shortage area. — 
The term 'frontier health professional shortage area' means an 
area — 

"(A) with a population density less than 6 persons per 
square mile within the service area; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



518 



"(B) with respect to which the distance or time for the 
population to access care is excessive. 

"(19) Graduate psychology. — The term 'graduate psy- 
chology' means an accredited program in professional psy- 
chology. 

"(20) Health disparity population. — The term 'health 
disparity population' has the meaning given such term in sec- 
tion 903(d)(1). 

"(21) Health literacy. — The term 'health literacy' means 
the degree to which an individual has the capacity to obtain, 
communicate, process, and understand health information and 
services in order to make appropriate health decisions. 

"(22) Mental health service professional. — The term 
'mental health service professional' means an individual with 
a graduate or postgraduate degree from an accredited institu- 
tion of higher education in psychiatry, psychology, school psy- 
chology, behavioral pediatrics, psychiatric nursing, social work, 
school social work, substance abuse disorder prevention and 
treatment, marriage and family counseling, school counseling, 
or professional counseling. 

"(23) One-stop delivery system center. — The term 'one- 
stop delivery system' means a one-stop delivery system de- 
scribed in section 134(c) of the Workforce Investment Act of 
1998 (29 U.S.C. 2864(c)). 

"(24) Paraprofessional child and adolescent mental 
health worker. — The term 'paraprofessional child and adoles- 
cent mental health worker' means an individual who is not a 
mental or behavioral health service professional, but who 
works at the first stage of contact with children and families 
who are seeking mental or behavioral health services, includ- 
ing substance abuse prevention and treatment services. 

"(25) Racial and ethnic minority group; racial and 
ethnic minority population. — The terms 'racial and ethnic 
minority group' and 'racial and ethnic minority population' 
have the meaning given the term 'racial and ethnic minority 
group' in section 1707. 

"(26) Rural health clinic. — The term 'rural health clinic' 
has the meaning given that term in section 1861(aa) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(aa)).". 

(c) Title VIII of the Public Health Service Act. — Section 
801 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 296) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (2) — 

(A) by striking "means a" and inserting "means an ac- 
credited (as defined in paragraph 6)"; and 

(B) by striking the period as inserting the following: 
"where graduates are — 

"(A) authorized to sit for the National Council Licen- 
sure EXamination-Registered Nurse (NCLEX-RN); or 

"(B) licensed registered nurses who will receive a grad- 
uate or equivalent degree or training to become an ad- 
vanced education nurse as defined by section 811(b)."; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following: 

"(16) Accelerated nursing degree program. — The term 
'accelerated nursing degree program' means a program of edu- 

June 9, 2010 



519 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5101 



cation in professional nursing offered by an accredited school 
of nursing in which an individual holding a bachelors degree 
in another discipline receives a BSN or MSN degree in an ac- 
celerated time frame as determined by the accredited school of 
nursing. 

"(17) Bridge or degree completion program. — The term 
'bridge or degree completion program' means a program of edu- 
cation in professional nursing offered by an accredited school 
of nursing, as defined in paragraph (2), that leads to a bacca- 
laureate degree in nursing. Such programs may include, Reg- 
istered Nurse (RN) to Bachelor's of Science of Nursing (BSN) 
programs, RN to MSN (Master of Science of Nursing) pro- 
grams, or BSN to Doctoral programs.". 

Subtitle B — Innovations in the Health Care 

Workforce 

SEC. 5101 [42 U.S.C. 294q]. NATIONAL HEALTH CARE WORKFORCE COM- 
MISSION. 

(a) Purpose. — It is the purpose of this section to establish a 
National Health Care Workforce Commission that — 

(1) serves as a national resource for Congress, the Presi- 
dent, States, and localities; 

(2) communicates and coordinates with the Departments of 
Health and Human Services, Labor, Veterans Affairs, Home- 
land Security, and Education on related activities administered 
by one or more of such Departments; 

(3) develops and commissions evaluations of education and 
training activities to determine whether the demand for health 
care workers is being met; 

(4) identifies barriers to improved coordination at the Fed- 
eral, State, and local levels and recommend ways to address 
such barriers; and 

(5) encourages innovations to address population needs, 
constant changes in technology, and other environmental fac- 
tors. 

(b) Establishment. — There is hereby established the National 
Health Care Workforce Commission (in this section referred to as 
the "Commission"). 

(c) Membership. — 

(1) Number and appointment. — The Commission shall be 
composed of 15 members to be appointed by the Comptroller 
General, without regard to section 5 of the Federal Advisory 
Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.). 

(2) Qualifications. — 

(A) In general. — The membership of the Commission 
shall include individuals — 

(i) with national recognition for their expertise in 
health care labor market analysis, including health 
care workforce analysis; health care finance and eco- 
nomics; health care facility management; health care 
plans and integrated delivery systems; health care 
workforce education and training; health care philan- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5101 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



520 



thropy; providers of health care services; and other re- 
lated fields; and 

(ii) who will provide a combination of professional 
perspectives, broad geographic representation, and a 
balance between urban, suburban, rural, and frontier 
representatives. 

(B) Inclusion. — 

(i) In general. — The membership of the Commis- 
sion shall include no less than one representative of — 

(I) the health care workforce and health pro- 
fessionals; 

(II) employers, including representatives of 
small business and self-employed individuals; [As 
revised by section 10501(a)(l)~\ 

(III) third-party payers; 

(IV) individuals skilled in the conduct and in- 
terpretation of health care services and health ec- 
onomics research; 

(V) representatives of consumers; 

(VI) labor unions; 

(VII) State or local workforce investment 
boards; and 

(VIII) educational institutions (which may in- 
clude elementary and secondary institutions, insti- 
tutions of higher education, including 2 and 4 year 
institutions, or registered apprenticeship pro- 
grams). 

(ii) Additional members. — The remaining mem- 
bership may include additional representatives from 
clause (i) and other individuals as determined appro- 
priate by the Comptroller General of the United 
States. 

(C) Majority non-providers. — Individuals who are 
directly involved in health professions education or prac- 
tice shall not constitute a majority of the membership of 
the Commission. 

(D) Ethical disclosure. — The Comptroller General 
shall establish a system for public disclosure by members 
of the Commission of financial and other potential conflicts 
of interest relating to such members. Members of the Com- 
mission shall be treated as employees of Congress for pur- 
poses of applying title I of the Ethics in Government Act 
of 1978. Members of the Commission shall not be treated 
as special government employees under title 18, United 
States Code. 

(3) Terms.— 

(A) In general. — The terms of members of the Com- 
mission shall be for 3 years except that the Comptroller 
General shall designate staggered terms for the members 
first appointed. 

(B) Vacancies. — Any member appointed to fill a va- 
cancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which 
the member's predecessor was appointed shall be ap- 
pointed only for the remainder of that term. A member 

June 9, 2010 



521 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5101 



may serve after the expiration of that member's term until 
a successor has taken office. A vacancy in the Commission 
shall be filled in the manner in which the original appoint- 
ment was made. 

(C) Initial appointments. — The Comptroller General 
shall make initial appointments of members to the Com- 
mission not later than September 30, 2010. 

(4) Compensation. — While serving on the business of the 
Commission (including travel time), a member of the Commis- 
sion shall be entitled to compensation at the per diem equiva- 
lent of the rate provided for level IV of the Executive Schedule 
under section 5315 of tile 5, United States Code, and while so 
serving away from home and the member's regular place of 
business, a member may be allowed travel expenses, as author- 
ized by the Chairman of the Commission. Physicians serving 
as personnel of the Commission may be provided a physician 
comparability allowance by the Commission in the same man- 
ner as Government physicians may be provided such an allow- 
ance by an agency under section 5948 of title 5, United States 
Code, and for such purpose subsection (i) of such section shall 
apply to the Commission in the same manner as it applies to 
the Tennessee Valley Authority. For purposes of pay (other 
than pay of members of the Commission) and employment ben- 
efits, rights, and privileges, all personnel of the Commission 
shall be treated as if they were employees of the United States 
Senate. Personnel of the Commission shall not be treated as 
employees of the Government Accountability Office for any 
purpose. 

(5) Chairman, vice chairman. — The Comptroller General 
shall designate a member of the Commission, at the time of ap- 
pointment of the member, as Chairman and a member as Vice 
Chairman for that term of appointment, except that in the case 
of vacancy of the chairmanship or vice chairmanship, the 
Comptroller General may designate another member for the 
remainder of that member's term. 

(6) Meetings. — The Commission shall meet at the call of 
the chairman, but no less frequently than on a quarterly basis, 
(d) Duties. — 

(1) Recognition, dissemination, and communication. — 
The Commission shall — 

(A) recognize efforts of Federal, State, and local part- 
nerships to develop and offer health care career pathways 
of proven effectiveness; 

(B) disseminate information on promising retention 
practices for health care professionals; and 

(C) communicate information on important policies 
and practices that affect the recruitment, education and 
training, and retention of the health care workforce. 

(2) Review of health care workforce and annual re- 
ports. — In order to develop a fiscally sustainable integrated 
workforce that supports a high-quality, readily accessible 
health care delivery system that meets the needs of patients 
and populations, the Commission, in consultation with relevant 
Federal, State, and local agencies, shall — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5101 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



522 



(A) review current and projected health care workforce 
supply and demand, including the topics described in para- 
graph (3); 

(B) make recommendations to Congress and the Ad- 
ministration concerning national health care workforce pri- 
orities, goals, and policies; 

(C) by not later than October 1 of each year (beginning 
with 2011), submit a report to Congress and the Adminis- 
tration containing the results of such reviews and rec- 
ommendations concerning related policies; and 

(D) by not later than April 1 of each year (beginning 
with 2011), submit a report to Congress and the Adminis- 
tration containing a review of, and recommendations on, at 
a minimum one high priority area as described in para- 
graph (4). 

(3) Specific topics to be reviewed. — The topics described 
in this paragraph include — 

(A) current health care workforce supply and distribu- 
tion, including demographics, skill sets, and demands, with 
projected demands during the subsequent 10 and 25 year 
periods; 

(B) health care workforce education and training ca- 
pacity, including the number of students who have com- 
pleted education and training, including registered appren- 
ticeships; the number of qualified faculty; the education 
and training infrastructure; and the education and train- 
ing demands, with projected demands during the subse- 
quent 10 and 25 year periods; 

(C) the education loan and grant programs in titles 
VII and VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
292 et seq. and 296 et seq.), with recommendations on 
whether such programs should become part of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001 et seq); 

(D) the implications of new and existing Federal poli- 
cies which affect the health care workforce, including 
Medicare and Medicaid graduate medical education poli- 
cies, titles VII and VIII of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 292 et seq. and 296 et seq.), the National 
Health Service Corps (with recommendations for aligning 
such programs with national health workforce priorities 
and goals), and other health care workforce programs, in- 
cluding those supported through the Workforce Investment 
Act of 1998 (29 U.S.C. 2801 et seq.), the Carl D. Perkins 
Career and Technical Education Act of 2006 (20 U.S.C. 
2301 et seq.), the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1001 et seq.), and any other Federal health care workforce 
programs; 

(E) the health care workforce needs of special popu- 
lations, such as minorities, rural populations, medically 
underserved populations, gender specific needs, individuals 
with disabilities, and geriatric and pediatric populations 
with recommendations for new and existing Federal poli- 
cies to meet the needs of these special populations; and 

June 9, 2010 



523 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5101 



(F) recommendations creating or revising national loan 
repayment programs and scholarship programs to require 
low-income, minority medical students to serve in their 
home communities, if designated as medical underserved 
community. 

(4) High priority areas. — 

(A) In general. — The initial high priority topics de- 
scribed in this paragraph include each of the following: 

(i) Integrated health care workforce planning that 
identifies health care professional skills needed and 
maximizes the skill sets of health care professionals 
across disciplines. 

(ii) An analysis of the nature, scopes of practice, 
and demands for health care workers in the enhanced 
information technology and management workplace. 

(iii) An analysis of how to align Medicare and 
Medicaid graduate medical education policies with na- 
tional workforce goals. 

(iv) [As added by section 10501(a)(3)~\ An analysis 
of, and recommendations for, eliminating the barriers 
to entering and staying in primary care, including pro- 
vider compensation. 

(v) The education and training capacity, projected 
demands, and integration with the health care deliv- 
ery system of each of the following: 

(I) Nursing workforce capacity at all levels. 

(II) Oral health care workforce capacity at all 
levels. 

(III) Mental and behavioral health care work- 
force capacity at all levels. 

(IV) Allied health and public health care 
workforce capacity at all levels. 

(V) Emergency medical service workforce ca- 
pacity, including the retention and recruitment of 
the volunteer workforce, at all levels. 

(VI) The geographic distribution of health 
care providers as compared to the identified 
health care workforce needs of States and regions. 

(B) Future determinations. — The Commission may 
require that additional topics be included under subpara- 
graph (A). The appropriate committees of Congress may 
recommend to the Commission the inclusion of other topics 
for health care workforce development areas that require 
special attention. 

(5) Grant program. — The Commission shall — 

(A) review implementation progress reports on, and re- 
port to Congress about, the State Health Care Workforce 
Development Grant program established in section 5102; 

(B) in collaboration with the Department of Labor and 
in coordination with the Department of Education and 
other relevant Federal agencies, make recommendations to 
the fiscal and administrative agent under section 5102(b) 
for grant recipients under section 5102; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5101 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



524 



(C) assess the implementation of the grants under 
such section; and 

(D) collect performance and report information, includ- 
ing identified models and best practices, on grants from 
the fiscal and administrative agent under such section and 
distribute this information to Congress, relevant Federal 
agencies, and to the public. 

(6) Study. — The Commission shall study effective mecha- 
nisms for financing education and training for careers in 
health care, including public health and allied health. 

(7) Recommendations. — The Commission shall submit 
recommendations to Congress, the Department of Labor, and 
the Department of Health and Human Services about improv- 
ing safety, health, and worker protections in the workplace for 
the health care workforce. 

(8) Assessment. — The Commission shall assess and re- 
ceive reports from the National Center for Health Care Work- 
force Analysis established under section 761(b) of the Public 
Service Health Act (as amended by section 5103). 

(e) Consultation With Federal, State, and Local Agen- 
cies, Congress, and Other Organizations. — 

(1) In general. — The Commission shall consult with Fed- 
eral agencies (including the Departments of Health and 
Human Services, Labor, Education, Commerce, Agriculture, 
Defense, and Veterans Affairs and the Environmental Protec- 
tion Agency), Congress, the Medicare Payment Advisory Com- 
mission, the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commis- 
sion, and, to the extent practicable, with State and local agen- 
cies, Indian tribes, voluntary health care organizations, profes- 
sional societies, and other relevant public-private health care 
partnerships. 

(2) Obtaining official data. — The Commission, con- 
sistent with established privacy rules, may secure directly from 
any department or agency of the Executive Branch information 
necessary to enable the Commission to carry out this section. 

(3) Detail of federal government employees. — An em- 
ployee of the Federal Government may be detailed to the Com- 
mission without reimbursement. The detail of such an em- 
ployee shall be without interruption or loss of civil service sta- 
tus. 

(f) Director and Staff; Experts and Consultants. — Subject 
to such review as the Comptroller General of the United States de- 
termines to be necessary to ensure the efficient administration of 
the Commission, the Commission may — 

(1) employ and fix the compensation of an executive direc- 
tor that shall not exceed the rate of basic pay payable for level 
V of the Executive Schedule and such other personnel as may 
be necessary to carry out its duties (without regard to the pro- 
visions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments 
in the competitive service); 

(2) seek such assistance and support as may be required 
in the performance of its duties from appropriate Federal de- 
partments and agencies; 

June 9, 2010 



525 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5101 



(3) enter into contracts or make other arrangements, as 
may be necessary for the conduct of the work of the Commis- 
sion (without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes 
(41 U.S.C. 5)); 

(4) make advance, progress, and other payments which re- 
late to the work of the Commission; 

(5) provide transportation and subsistence for persons 
serving without compensation; and 

(6) prescribe such rules and regulations as the Commission 
determines to be necessary with respect to the internal organi- 
zation and operation of the Commission. 

(g) Powers. — 

(1) Data collection. — In order to carry out its functions 
under this section, the Commission shall — 

(A) utilize existing information, both published and 
unpublished, where possible, collected and assessed either 
by its own staff or under other arrangements made in ac- 
cordance with this section, including coordination with the 
Bureau of Labor Statistics; 

(B) carry out, or award grants or contracts for the car- 
rying out of, original research and development, where ex- 
isting information is inadequate, and 

(C) adopt procedures allowing interested parties to 
submit information for the Commission's use in making re- 
ports and recommendations. 

(2) Access of the government accountability office 
to information. — The Comptroller General of the United 
States shall have unrestricted access to all deliberations, 
records, and data of the Commission, immediately upon re- 
quest. 

(3) Periodic audit. — The Commission shall be subject to 
periodic audit by an independent public accountant under con- 
tract to the Commission. 

(h) Authorization of Appropriations. — 

(1) Request for appropriations. — The Commission shall 
submit requests for appropriations in the same manner as the 
Comptroller General of the United States submits requests for 
appropriations. Amounts so appropriated for the Commission 
shall be separate from amounts appropriated for the Comp- 
troller General. 

(2) Authorization. — There are authorized to be appro- 
priated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this sec- 
tion. 

(3) Gifts and services. — The Commission may not accept 
gifts, bequeaths, or donations of property, but may accept and 
use donations of services for purposes of carrying out this sec- 
tion. 

(i) Definitions. — In this section: 

(1) Health care workforce. — The term "health care 
workforce" includes all health care providers with direct pa- 
tient care and support responsibilities, such as physicians, 
nurses, nurse practitioners, primary care providers, preventive 
medicine physicians, optometrists, ophthalmologists, physician 
assistants, pharmacists, dentists, dental hygienists, and other 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5102 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



526 



oral healthcare professionals, allied health professionals, doc- 
tors of chiropractic, community health workers, health care 
paraprofessionals, direct care workers, psychologists and other 
behavioral and mental health professionals (including sub- 
stance abuse prevention and treatment providers), social work- 
ers, physical and occupational therapists, certified nurse mid- 
wives, podiatrists, the EMS workforce (including professional 
and volunteer ambulance personnel and firefighters who per- 
form emergency medical services), licensed complementary and 
alternative medicine providers, integrative health practi- 
tioners, public health professionals, and any other health pro- 
fessional that the Comptroller General of the United States de- 
termines appropriate. 

(2) Health professionals. — The term "health profes- 
sionals" includes — 

(A) dentists, dental hygienists, primary care providers, 
specialty physicians, nurses, nurse practitioners, physician 
assistants, psychologists and other behavioral and mental 
health professionals (including substance abuse prevention 
and treatment providers), social workers, physical and oc- 
cupational therapists, [possible intended addition by sec- 
tion 10501(a)(3) — which amended subsection (i)(2)(B): op- 
tometrists, ophthalmologists,] public health professionals, 
clinical pharmacists, allied health professionals, doctors of 
chiropractic, community health workers, school nurses, 
certified nurse midwives, podiatrists, licensed complemen- 
tary and alternative medicine providers, the EMS work- 
force (including professional and volunteer ambulance per- 
sonnel and firefighters who perform emergency medical 
services), and integrative health practitioners; 

(B) national representatives of health professionals; 

(C) representatives of schools of medicine, osteopathy, 
nursing, dentistry, optometry, pharmacy, chiropractic, al- 
lied health, educational programs for public health profes- 
sionals, behavioral and mental health professionals (as so 
defined), social workers, pharmacists, physical and occupa- 
tional therapists, [possible intended addition by section 
10501(a)(3) — which amended subsection (i)(2)(B): optom- 
etrists, ophthalmologists,] oral health care industry den- 
tistry and dental hygiene, and physician assistants; 

(D) representatives of public and private teaching hos- 
pitals, and ambulatory health facilities, including Federal 
medical facilities; and 

(E) any other health professional the Comptroller Gen- 
eral of the United States determines appropriate. 

SEC. 5102 [42 U.S.C. 294r]. STATE HEALTH CARE WORKFORCE DEVEL- 
OPMENT GRANTS. 

(a) Establishment. — There is established a competitive health 
care workforce development grant program (referred to in this sec- 
tion as the "program") for the purpose of enabling State partner- 
ships to complete comprehensive planning and to carry out activi- 
ties leading to coherent and comprehensive health care workforce 
development strategies at the State and local levels. 

June 9, 2010 



527 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5102 



(b) Fiscal and Administrative Agent. — The Health Re- 
sources and Services Administration of the Department of Health 
and Human Services (referred to in this section as the "Administra- 
tion") shall be the fiscal and administrative agent for the grants 
awarded under this section. The Administration is authorized to 
carry out the program, in consultation with the National Health 
Care Workforce Commission (referred to in this section as the 
"Commission"), which shall review reports on the development, im- 
plementation, and evaluation activities of the grant program, in- 
cluding — 

(1) administering the grants; 

(2) providing technical assistance to grantees; and 

(3) reporting performance information to the Commission. 

(c) Planning Grants. — 

(1) Amount and duration. — A planning grant shall be 
awarded under this subsection for a period of not more than 
one year and the maximum award may not be more than 
$150,000. 

(2) Eligibility. — To be eligible to receive a planning grant, 
an entity shall be an eligible partnership. An eligible partner- 
ship shall be a State workforce investment board, if it includes 
or modifies the members to include at least one representative 
from each of the following: health care employer, labor organi- 
zation, a public 2-year institution of higher education, a public 
4-year institution of higher education, the recognized State fed- 
eration of labor, the State public secondary education agency, 
the State P— 16 or P-20 Council if such a council exists, and a 
philanthropic organization that is actively engaged in pro- 
viding learning, mentoring, and work opportunities to recruit, 
educate, and train individuals for, and retain individuals in, 
careers in health care and related industries. 

(3) Fiscal and administrative agent. — The Governor of 
the State receiving a planning grant has the authority to ap- 
point a fiscal and an administrative agency for the partner- 
ship. 

(4) Application. — Each State partnership desiring a plan- 
ning grant shall submit an application to the Administrator of 
the Administration at such time and in such manner, and ac- 
companied by such information as the Administrator may rea- 
sonable require. Each application submitted for a planning 
grant shall describe the members of the State partnership, the 
activities for which assistance is sought, the proposed perform- 
ance benchmarks to be used to measure progress under the 
planning grant, a budget for use of the funds to complete the 
required activities described in paragraph (5), and such addi- 
tional assurance and information as the Administrator deter- 
mines to be essential to ensure compliance with the grant pro- 
gram requirements. 

(5) Required activities. — A State partnership receiving a 
planning grant shall carry out the following: 

(A) Analyze State labor market information in order to 
create health care career pathways for students and 
adults, including dislocated workers. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5102 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



528 



(B) Identify current and projected high demand State 
or regional health care sectors for purposes of planning ca- 
reer pathways. 

(C) Identify existing Federal, State, and private re- 
sources to recruit, educate or train, and retain a skilled 
health care workforce and strengthen partnerships. 

(D) Describe the academic and health care industry 
skill standards for high school graduation, for entry into 
postsecondary education, and for various credentials and 
licensure. 

(E) Describe State secondary and postsecondary edu- 
cation and training policies, models, or practices for the 
health care sector, including career information and guid- 
ance counseling. 

(F) Identify Federal or State policies or rules to devel- 
oping a coherent and comprehensive health care workforce 
development strategy and barriers and a plan to resolve 
these barriers. 

(G) Participate in the Administration's evaluation and 
reporting activities. 

(6) Performance and evaluation. — Before the State 
partnership receives a planning grant, such partnership and 
the Administrator of the Administration shall jointly determine 
the performance benchmarks that will be established for the 
purposes of the planning grant. 

(7) Match. — Each State partnership receiving a planning 
grant shall provide an amount, in cash or in kind, that is not 
less that 15 percent of the amount of the grant, to carry out 
the activities supported by the grant. The matching require- 
ment may be provided from funds available under other Fed- 
eral, State, local or private sources to carry out the activities. 

(8) Report — 

(A) Report to administration. — Not later than 1 
year after a State partnership receives a planning grant, 
the partnership shall submit a report to the Administra- 
tion on the State's performance of the activities under the 
grant, including the use of funds, including matching 
funds, to carry out required activities, and a description of 
the progress of the State workforce investment board in 
meeting the performance benchmarks. 

(B) Report to congress. — The Administration shall 
submit a report to Congress analyzing the planning activi- 
ties, performance, and fund utilization of each State grant 
recipient, including an identification of promising practices 
and a profile of the activities of each State grant recipient. 

(d) Implementation Grants. — 

(1) In general. — The Administration shall — 

(A) competitively award implementation grants to 
State partnerships to enable such partnerships to imple- 
ment activities that will result in a coherent and com- 
prehensive plan for health workforce development that will 
address current and projected workforce demands within 
the State; and 

June 9, 2010 



529 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5102 



(B) inform the Commission and Congress about the 
awards made. 

(2) Duration. — An implementation grant shall be awarded 
for a period of no more than 2 years, except in those cases 
where the Administration determines that the grantee is high 
performing and the activities supported by the grant warrant 
up to 1 additional year of funding. 

(3) Eligibility. — To be eligible for an implementation 
grant, a State partnership shall have — 

(A) received a planning grant under subsection (c) and 
completed all requirements of such grant; or 

(B) completed a satisfactory application, including a 
plan to coordinate with required partners and complete the 
required activities during the 2 year period of the imple- 
mentation grant. 

(4) Fiscal and administrative agent. — A State partner- 
ship receiving an implementation grant shall appoint a fiscal 
and an administration agent for the implementation of such 
grant. 

(5) Application. — Each eligible State partnership desiring 
an implementation grant shall submit an application to the 
Administration at such time, in such manner, and accom- 
panied by such information as the Administration may reason- 
ably require. Each application submitted shall include — 

(A) a description of the members of the State partner- 
ship; 

(B) a description of how the State partnership com- 
pleted the required activities under the planning grant, if 
applicable; 

(C) a description of the activities for which implemen- 
tation grant funds are sought, including grants to regions 
by the State partnership to advance coherent and com- 
prehensive regional health care workforce planning activi- 
ties; 

(D) a description of how the State partnership will co- 
ordinate with required partners and complete the required 
partnership activities during the duration of an implemen- 
tation grant; 

(E) a budget proposal of the cost of the activities sup- 
ported by the implementation grant and a timeline for the 
provision of matching funds required; 

(F) proposed performance benchmarks to be used to 
assess and evaluate the progress of the partnership activi- 
ties; 

(G) a description of how the State partnership will col- 
lect data to report progress in grant activities; and 

(H) such additional assurances as the Administration 
determines to be essential to ensure compliance with grant 
requirements. 

(6) Required activities. — 

(A) In general. — A State partnership that receives an 
implementation grant may reserve not less than 60 per- 
cent of the grant funds to make grants to be competitively 
awarded by the State partnership, consistent with State 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5102 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



530 



procurement rules, to encourage regional partnerships to 
address health care workforce development needs and to 
promote innovative health care workforce career pathway 
activities, including career counseling, learning, and em- 
ployment. 

(B) Eligible partnership duties. — An eligible State 
partnership receiving an implementation grant shall — 

(i) identify and convene regional leadership to dis- 
cuss opportunities to engage in statewide health care 
workforce development planning, including the poten- 
tial use of competitive grants to improve the develop- 
ment, distribution, and diversity of the regional health 
care workforce; the alignment of curricula for health 
care careers; and the access to quality career informa- 
tion and guidance and education and training opportu- 
nities; 

(ii) in consultation with key stakeholders and re- 
gional leaders, take appropriate steps to reduce Fed- 
eral, State, or local barriers to a comprehensive and 
coherent strategy, including changes in State or local 
policies to foster coherent and comprehensive health 
care workforce development activities, including 
health care career pathways at the regional and State 
levels, career planning information, retraining for dis- 
located workers, and as appropriate, requests for Fed- 
eral program or administrative waivers; 

(iii) develop, disseminate, and review with key 
stakeholders a preliminary statewide strategy that ad- 
dresses short- and long-term health care workforce de- 
velopment supply versus demand; 

(iv) convene State partnership members on a reg- 
ular basis, and at least on a semiannual basis; 

(v) assist leaders at the regional level to form 
partnerships, including technical assistance and capac- 
ity building activities; 

(vi) collect and assess data on and report on the 
performance benchmarks selected by the State part- 
nership and the Administration for implementation ac- 
tivities carried out by regional and State partnerships; 
and 

(vii) participate in the Administration's evaluation 
and reporting activities. 

(7) Performance and evaluation. — Before the State 
partnership receives an implementation grant, it and the Ad- 
ministrator shall jointly determine the performance bench- 
marks that shall be established for the purposes of the imple- 
mentation grant. 

(8) Match. — Each State partnership receiving an imple- 
mentation grant shall provide an amount, in cash or in kind 
that is not less than 25 percent of the amount of the grant, to 
carry out the activities supported by the grant. The matching 
funds may be provided from funds available from other Fed- 
eral, State, local, or private sources to carry out such activities. 

(9) Reports. — 

June 9, 2010 



531 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5103 



(A) Report to administration. — For each year of the 
implementation grant, the State partnership receiving the 
implementation grant shall submit a report to the Admin- 
istration on the performance of the State of the grant ac- 
tivities, including a description of the use of the funds, in- 
cluding matched funds, to complete activities, and a de- 
scription of the performance of the State partnership in 
meeting the performance benchmarks. 

(B) Report to congress. — The Administration shall 
submit a report to Congress analyzing implementation ac- 
tivities, performance, and fund utilization of the State 
grantees, including an identification of promising practices 
and a profile of the activities of each State grantee. 

(e) Authorization for Appropriations. — 

(1) Planning grants. — There are authorized to be appro- 
priated to award planning grants under subsection (c) 
$8,000,000 for fiscal year 2010, and such sums as may be nec- 
essary for each subsequent fiscal year. 

(2) Implementation grants. — There are authorized to be 
appropriated to award implementation grants under subsection 
(d), $150,000,000 for fiscal year 2010, and such sums as may 
be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year. 

SEC. 5103. HEALTH CARE WORKFORCE ASSESSMENT. 

(a) In General. — Section 761 of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 294m) is amended— 

(1) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (e); 

(2) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following: 
"(b) National Center for Health Care Workforce Anal- 
ysis— 

"(1) Establishment. — The Secretary shall establish the 
National Center for Health Workforce Analysis (referred to in 
this section as the 'National Center'). 

"(2) Purposes. — The National Center, in coordination to 
the extent practicable with the National Health Care Work- 
force Commission (established in section 5101 of the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act), and relevant regional and 
State centers and agencies, shall — 

"(A) provide for the development of information de- 
scribing and analyzing the health care workforce and 
workforce related issues; 

"(B) carry out the activities under section 792(a); 
"(C) annually evaluate programs under this title; 
"(D) develop and publish performance measures and 
benchmarks for programs under this title; and 

"(E) establish, maintain, and publicize a national 
Internet registry of each grant awarded under this title 
and a database to collect data from longitudinal evalua- 
tions (as described in subsection (d)(2)) on performance 
measures (as developed under sections 749(d)(3), 757(d)(3), 
and 762(a)(3)). 

"(3) Collaboration and data sharing. — 

"(A) In general. — The National Center shall collabo- 
rate with Federal agencies and relevant professional and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5103 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



532 



educational organizations or societies for the purpose of 
linking data regarding grants awarded under this title. 

"(B) Contracts for health workforce analysis. — 
For the purpose of carrying out the activities described in 
subparagraph (A), the National Center may enter into con- 
tracts with relevant professional and educational organiza- 
tions or societies. 
"(c) State and Regional Centers for Health Workforce 
Analysis. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall award grants to, or 
enter into contracts with, eligible entities for purposes of — 

"(A) collecting, analyzing, and reporting data regard- 
ing programs under this title to the National Center and 
to the public; and 

"(B) providing technical assistance to local and re- 
gional entities on the collection, analysis, and reporting of 
data. 

"(2) Eligible entities. — To be eligible for a grant or con- 
tract under this subsection, an entity shall — 

"(A) be a State, a State workforce investment board, a 
public health or health professions school, an academic 
health center, or an appropriate public or private nonprofit 
entity; and 

"(B) submit to the Secretary an application at such 

time, in such manner, and containing such information as 

the Secretary may require. 
"(d) Increase in Grants for Longitudinal Evaluations. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall increase the amount 
awarded to an eligible entity under this title for a longitudinal 
evaluation of individuals who have received education, train- 
ing, or financial assistance from programs under this title. 

"(2) Capability. — A longitudinal evaluation shall be capa- 
ble of— 

"(A) studying practice patterns; and 

"(B) collecting and reporting data on performance 

measures developed under sections 749(d)(3), 757(d)(3), 

and 762(a)(3). 

"(3) Guidelines. — A longitudinal evaluation shall comply 
with guidelines issued under sections 749(d)(4), 757(d)(4), and 
762(a)(4). 

"(4) Eligible entities. — To be eligible to obtain an in- 
crease under this section, an entity shall be a recipient of a 
grant or contract under this title."; and 

(3) in subsection (e), as so redesignated — 

(A) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the fol- 
lowing: 

"(1) In general. — 

"(A) National center. — To carry out subsection (b), 
there are authorized to be appropriated $7,500,000 for 
each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014. 

"(B) State and regional centers. — To carry out sub- 
section (c), there are authorized to be appropriated 
$4,500,000 for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014. 

June 9, 2010 



533 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5103 



"(C) Grants for longitudinal evaluations. — To 
carry out subsection (d), there are authorized to be appro- 
priated such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 
2010 through 2014."; and 

(4) in paragraph (2), by striking "subsection (a)" and in- 
serting "paragraph (1)". 

(b) Transfers. — Not later than 180 days after the date of en- 
actment of this Act, the responsibilities and resources of the Na- 
tional Center for Health Workforce Analysis, as in effect on the 
date before the date of enactment of this Act, shall be transferred 
to the National Center for Health Care Workforce Analysis estab- 
lished under section 761 of the Public Health Service Act, as 
amended by subsection (a). 

(c) Use of Longitudinal Evaluations. — Section 791(a)(1) of 
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 295j(a)(D) is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (A), by striking "or" at the end; 

(2) in subparagraph (B), by striking the period and insert- 
ing "; or"; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following: 

"(C) utilizes a longitudinal evaluation (as described in 
section 761(d)(2)) and reports data from such system to the 
national workforce database (as established under section 
761(b)(2)(E)).". 

(d) Performance Measures; Guidelines for Longitudinal 
Evaluations. — 

(1) Advisory committee on training in primary care 
medicine and dentistry. — Section 748(d) of the Public Health 
Service Act is amended — 

(A) in paragraph (1), by striking "and" at the end; 

(B) in paragraph (2), by striking the period and insert- 
ing a semicolon; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following: 

"(3) develop, publish, and implement performance meas- 
ures for programs under this part; 

"(4) develop and publish guidelines for longitudinal evalua- 
tions (as described in section 761(d)(2)) for programs under this 
part; and 

"(5) recommend appropriation levels for programs under 
this part.". 

(2) Advisory committee on interdisciplinary, commu- 
nity-based linkages. — Section 756(d) of the Public Health 
Service Act is amended — 

(A) in paragraph (1), by striking "and" at the end; 

(B) in paragraph (2), by striking the period and insert- 
ing a semicolon; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following: 

"(3) develop, publish, and implement performance meas- 
ures for programs under this part; 

"(4) develop and publish guidelines for longitudinal evalua- 
tions (as described in section 761(d)(2)) for programs under this 
part; and 

"(5) recommend appropriation levels for programs under 
this part.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5104 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



534 



(3) Advisory council on graduate medical edu- 
cation— Section 762(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 294o(a)) is amended— 

(A) in paragraph (1), by striking "and" at the end; 

(B) in paragraph (2), by striking the period and insert- 
ing a semicolon; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following: 

"(3) develop, publish, and implement performance meas- 
ures for programs under this title, except for programs under 
part C or D; 

"(4) develop and publish guidelines for longitudinal evalua- 
tions (as described in section 761(d)(2)) for programs under this 
title, except for programs under part C or D; and 

"(5) recommend appropriation levels for programs under 
this title, except for programs under part C or D.". 

SEC. 5104. INTERAGENCY TASK FORCE TO ASSESS AND IMPROVE AC- 
CESS TO HEALTH CARE IN THE STATE OF ALASKA. 

[Section added by section 10501(bT\ 

(a) Establishment. — There is established a task force to be 
known as the "Interagency Access to Health Care in Alaska Task 
Force" (referred to in this section as the "Task Force"). 

(b) Duties— The Task Force shall— 

(1) assess access to health care for beneficiaries of Federal 
health care systems in Alaska; and 

(2) develop a strategy for the Federal Government to im- 
prove delivery of health care to Federal beneficiaries in the 
State of Alaska. 

(c) Membership. — The Task Force shall be comprised of Fed- 
eral members who shall be appointed, not later than 45 days after 
the date of enactment of this Act, as follows: 

(1) The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall ap- 
point one representative of each of the following: 

(A) The Department of Health and Human Services. 

(B) The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 

(C) The Indian Health Service. 

(2) The Secretary of Defense shall appoint one representa- 
tive of the TRICARE Management Activity. 

(3) The Secretary of the Army shall appoint one represent- 
ative of the Army Medical Department. 

(4) The Secretary of the Air Force shall appoint one rep- 
resentative of the Air Force, from among officers at the Air 
Force performing medical service functions. 

(5) The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall appoint one 
representative of each of the following: 

(A) The Department of Veterans Affairs. 

(B) The Veterans Health Administration. 

(6) The Secretary of Homeland Security shall appoint one 
representative of the United States Coast Guard. 

(d) Chairperson. — One chairperson of the Task Force shall be 
appointed by the Secretary at the time of appointment of members 
under subsection (c), selected from among the members appointed 
under paragraph (1). 

(e) Meetings. — The Task Force shall meet at the call of the 
chairperson. 

June 9, 2010 



535 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5202. 



(f) Report. — Not later than 180 days after the date of enact- 
ment of this Act, the Task Force shall submit to Congress a report 
detailing the activities of the Task Force and containing the find- 
ings, strategies, recommendations, policies, and initiatives devel- 
oped pursuant to the duty described in subsection (b)(2). In pre- 
paring such report, the Task Force shall consider completed and 
ongoing efforts by Federal agencies to improve access to health care 
in the State of Alaska. 

(g) Termination. — The Task Force shall be terminated on the 
date of submission of the report described in subsection (f). 

Subtitle C — Increasing the Supply of the 
Health Care Workforce 

SEC. 5201. FEDERALLY SUPPORTED STUDENT LOAN FUNDS. 

(a) Medical Schools and Primary Health Care. — Section 
723 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 292s) is amended— 

(1) in subsection (a) — 

(A) in paragraph (1), by striking subparagraph (B) and 
inserting the following: 

"(B) to practice in such care for 10 years (including 
residency training in primary health care) or through the 
date on which the loan is repaid in full, whichever occurs 
first."; and 

(B) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the fol- 
lowing: 

"(3) Noncompliance by student. — Each agreement en- 
tered into with a student pursuant to paragraph (1) shall pro- 
vide that, if the student fails to comply with such agreement, 
the loan involved will begin to accrue interest at a rate of 2 
percent per year greater than the rate at which the student 
would pay if compliant in such year."; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following: 

"(d) Sense of Congress. — It is the sense of Congress that 
funds repaid under the loan program under this section should not 
be transferred to the Treasury of the United States or otherwise 
used for any other purpose other than to carry out this section.". 

(b) Student Loan Guidelines. — The Secretary of Health and 
Human Services shall not require parental financial information 
for an independent student to determine financial need under sec- 
tion 723 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 292s) and the 
determination of need for such information shall be at the discre- 
tion of applicable school loan officer. The Secretary shall amend 
guidelines issued by the Health Resources and Services Adminis- 
tration in accordance with the preceding sentence. 

SEC. 5202. NURSING STUDENT LOAN PROGRAM. 

(a) Loan Agreements. — Section 836(a) of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 297b(a)) is amended— 

(1) by striking "$2,500" and inserting "$3,300"; 

(2) by striking "$4,000" and inserting "$5,200"; and 

(3) by striking "$13,000" and all that follows through the 
period and inserting "$17,000 in the case of any student during 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5203 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



536 



fiscal years 2010 and 2011. After fiscal year 2011, such 
amounts shall be adjusted to provide for a cost-of-attendance 
increase for the yearly loan rate and the aggregate of the 
loans.". 

(b) Loan Provisions. — Section 836(b) of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 297b(b)) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (1)(C), by striking "1986" and inserting 
"2000"; and 

(2) in paragraph (3), by striking "the date of enactment of 
the Nurse Training Amendments of 1979" and inserting "Sep- 
tember 29, 1995". 

SEC. 5203. HEALTH CARE WORKFORCE LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAMS. 

Part E of title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
294n et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"Subpart 3 — Recruitment and Retention Programs 

"SEC. 775 [42 U.S.C. 295Q. INVESTMENT IN TOMORROW'S PEDIATRIC 
HEALTH CARE WORKFORCE. 

"(a) Establishment. — The Secretary shall establish and carry 
out a pediatric specialty loan repayment program under which the 
eligible individual agrees to be employed full-time for a specified 
period (which shall not be less than 2 years) in providing pediatric 
medical subspecialty, pediatric surgical specialty, or child and ado- 
lescent mental and behavioral health care, including substance 
abuse prevention and treatment services. 

"(b) Program Administration. — Through the program estab- 
lished under this section, the Secretary shall enter into contracts 
with qualified health professionals under which — 

"(1) such qualified health professionals will agree to pro- 
vide pediatric medical subspecialty, pediatric surgical specialty, 
or child and adolescent mental and behavioral health care in 
an area with a shortage of the specified pediatric subspecialty 
that has a sufficient pediatric population to support such pedi- 
atric subspecialty, as determined by the Secretary; and 

"(2) the Secretary agrees to make payments on the prin- 
cipal and interest of undergraduate, graduate, or graduate 
medical education loans of professionals described in para- 
graph (1) of not more than $35,000 a year for each year of 
agreed upon service under such paragraph for a period of not 
more than 3 years during the qualified health professional's — 
"(A) participation in an accredited pediatric medical 
subspecialty, pediatric surgical specialty, or child and ado- 
lescent mental health subspecialty residency or fellowship; 
or 

"(B) employment as a pediatric medical subspecialist, 
pediatric surgical specialist, or child and adolescent mental 
health professional serving an area or population described 
in such paragraph. 
"(c) In General. — 

"(1) Eligible individuals. — 

"(A) Pediatric medical specialists and pediatric 
surgical specialists. — For purposes of contracts with re- 
June 9, 2010 



537 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5203X775 PHSA 



spect to pediatric medical specialists and pediatric surgical 
specialists, the term 'qualified health professional' means 
a licensed physician who — 

"(i) is entering or receiving training in an accred- 
ited pediatric medical subspecialty or pediatric sur- 
gical specialty residency or fellowship; or 

"(ii) has completed (but not prior to the end of the 
calendar year in which this section is enacted) the 
training described in subparagraph (B). 
"(B) Child and adolescent mental and behavioral 
health. — For purposes of contracts with respect to child 
and adolescent mental and behavioral health care, the 
term 'qualified health professional' means a health care 
professional who — 

"(i) has received specialized training or clinical ex- 
perience in child and adolescent mental health in psy- 
chiatry, psychology, school psychology, behavioral pe- 
diatrics, psychiatric nursing, social work, school social 
work, substance abuse disorder prevention and treat- 
ment, marriage and family therapy, school counseling, 
or professional counseling; 

"(ii) has a license or certification in a State to 
practice allopathic medicine, osteopathic medicine, 
psychology, school psychology, psychiatric nursing, so- 
cial work, school social work, marriage and family 
therapy, school counseling, or professional counseling; 
or 

"(hi) is a mental health service professional who 
completed (but not before the end of the calendar year 
in which this section is enacted) specialized training or 
clinical experience in child and adolescent mental 
health described in clause (i). 
"(2) Additional eligibility requirements. — The Sec- 
retary may not enter into a contract under this subsection with 
an eligible individual unless — 

"(A) the individual agrees to work in, or for a provider 
serving, a health professional shortage area or medically 
underserved area, or to serve a medically underserved pop- 
ulation; 

"(B) the individual is a United States citizen or a per- 
manent legal United States resident; and 

"(C) if the individual is enrolled in a graduate pro- 
gram, the program is accredited, and the individual has an 
acceptable level of academic standing (as determined by 
the Secretary). 

"(d) Priority. — In entering into contracts under this sub- 
section, the Secretary shall give priority to applicants who — 

"(1) are or will be working in a school or other pre-kinder- 
garten, elementary, or secondary education setting; 

"(2) have familiarity with evidence-based methods and cul- 
tural and linguistic competence health care services; and 

"(3) demonstrate financial need. 
"(e) Authorization of Appropriations. — There is authorized 
to be appropriated $30,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2010 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5204 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



538 



through 2014 to carry out subsection (c)(1)(A) and $20,000,000 for 
each of fiscal years 2010 through 2013 to carry out subsection 
(c)(1)(B).". 

SEC. 5204. PUBLIC HEALTH WORKFORCE RECRUITMENT AND RETEN- 
TION PROGRAMS. 

Part E of title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
294n et seq.), as amended by section 5203, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following: 

"SEC. 776 [42 U.S.C. 295f-l]. PUBLIC HEALTH WORKFORCE LOAN RE- 
PAYMENT PROGRAM. 

"(a) Establishment. — The Secretary shall establish the Public 
Health Workforce Loan Repayment Program (referred to in this 
section as the 'Program') to assure an adequate supply of public 
health professionals to eliminate critical public health workforce 
shortages in Federal, State, local, and tribal public health agencies. 

"(b) Eligibility. — To be eligible to participate in the Program, 
an individual shall — 

"(1)(A) be accepted for enrollment, or be enrolled, as a stu- 
dent in an accredited academic educational institution in a 
State or territory in the final year of a course of study or pro- 
gram leading to a public health or health professions degree or 
certificate; and have accepted employment with a Federal, 
State, local, or tribal public health agency, or a related training 
fellowship, as recognized by the Secretary, to commence upon 
graduation; 

"(B)(i) have graduated, during the preceding 10-year pe- 
riod, from an accredited educational institution in a State or 
territory and received a public health or health professions de- 
gree or certificate; and 

"(ii) be employed by, or have accepted employment with, a 
Federal, State, local, or tribal public health agency or a related 
training fellowship, as recognized by the Secretary; 

"(2) be a United States citizen; and 

"(3)(A) submit an application to the Secretary to partici- 
pate in the Program; 

"(B) execute a written contract as required in subsection 
(c); and 

"(4) not have received, for the same service, a reduction of 
loan obligations under section 455(m), 428J, 428K, 428L, or 
460 of the Higher Education Act of 1965. 

"(c) Contract. — The written contract (referred to in this sec- 
tion as the 'written contract') between the Secretary and an indi- 
vidual shall contain — 

"(1) an agreement on the part of the Secretary that the 
Secretary will repay on behalf of the individual loans incurred 
by the individual in the pursuit of the relevant degree or cer- 
tificate in accordance with the terms of the contract; 

"(2) an agreement on the part of the individual that the in- 
dividual will serve in the full-time employment of a Federal, 
State, local, or tribal public health agency or a related fellow- 
ship program in a position related to the course of study or 
program for which the contract was awarded for a period of 

June 9, 2010 



539 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5204Y776 PHSA 



time (referred to in this section as the 'period of obligated serv- 
ice') equal to the greater of — 
"(A) 3 years; or 

"(B) such longer period of time as determined appro- 
priate by the Secretary and the individual; 
"(3) an agreement, as appropriate, on the part of the indi- 
vidual to relocate to a priority service area (as determined by 
the Secretary) in exchange for an additional loan repayment 
incentive amount to be determined by the Secretary; 

"(4) a provision that any financial obligation of the United 
States arising out of a contract entered into under this section 
and any obligation of the individual that is conditioned there- 
on, is contingent on funds being appropriated for loan repay- 
ments under this section; 

"(5) a statement of the damages to which the United 
States is entitled, under this section for the individual's breach 
of the contract; and 

"(6) such other statements of the rights and liabilities of 
the Secretary and of the individual, not inconsistent with this 
section. 

"(d) Payments. — 

"(1) In general. — A loan repayment provided for an indi- 
vidual under a written contract under the Program shall con- 
sist of payment, in accordance with paragraph (2), on behalf of 
the individual of the principal, interest, and related expenses 
on government and commercial loans received by the indi- 
vidual regarding the undergraduate or graduate education of 
the individual (or both), which loans were made for tuition ex- 
penses incurred by the individual. 

"(2) Payments for years served. — For each year of obli- 
gated service that an individual contracts to serve under sub- 
section (c) the Secretary may pay up to $35,000 on behalf of 
the individual for loans described in paragraph (1). With re- 
spect to participants under the Program whose total eligible 
loans are less than $105,000, the Secretary shall pay an 
amount that does not exceed of the eligible loan balance for 
each year of obligated service of the individual. 

"(3) Tax liability. — For the purpose of providing reim- 
bursements for tax liability resulting from payments under 
paragraph (2) on behalf of an individual, the Secretary shall, 
in addition to such payments, make payments to the individual 
in an amount not to exceed 39 percent of the total amount of 
loan repayments made for the taxable year involved. 
"(e) Postponing Obligated Service. — With respect to an indi- 
vidual receiving a degree or certificate from a health professions or 
other related school, the date of the initiation of the period of obli- 
gated service may be postponed as approved by the Secretary. 

"(f) Breach of Contract. — An individual who fails to comply 
with the contract entered into under subsection (c) shall be subject 
to the same financial penalties as provided for under section 338E 
for breaches of loan repayment contracts under section 338B. 

"(g) Authorization of Appropriations. — There is authorized 
to be appropriated to carry out this section $195,000,000 for fiscal 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5205 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



540 



year 2010, and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal 
years 2011 through 2015.". 

SEC. 5205 [20 U.S.C. 1078-11]. ALLIED HEALTH WORKFORCE RECRUIT- 
MENT AND RETENTION PROGRAMS. 

(a) Purpose. — The purpose of this section is to assure an ade- 
quate supply of allied health professionals to eliminate critical al- 
lied health workforce shortages in Federal, State, local, and tribal 
public health agencies or in settings where patients might require 
health care services, including acute care facilities, ambulatory 
care facilities, personal residences and other settings, as recognized 
by the Secretary of Health and Human Services by authorizing an 
Allied Health Loan Forgiveness Program. 

(b) Allied Health Workforce Recruitment and Retention 
Program. — Section 428K of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1078-11) is amended— 

(1) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the following: 
"(18) Allied health professionals. — The individual is 

employed full-time as an allied health professional — 

"(A) in a Federal, State, local, or tribal public health 
agency; or 

"(B) in a setting where patients might require health 
care services, including acute care facilities, ambulatory 
care facilities, personal residences and other settings lo- 
cated in health professional shortage areas, medically un- 
derserved areas, or medically underserved populations, as 
recognized by the Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices."; and 

(2) in subsection (g) — 

(A) by redesignating paragraphs (1) through (9) as 
paragraphs (2) through (10), respectively; and 

(B) by inserting before paragraph (2) (as redesignated 
by subparagraph (A)) the following: 

"(1) Allied health professional. — The term 'allied 
health professional' means an allied health professional as de- 
fined in section 799B(5) of the Public Heath Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 295p(5)) who— 

"(A) has graduated and received an allied health pro- 
fessions degree or certificate from an institution of higher 
education; and 

"(B) is employed with a Federal, State, local or tribal 
public health agency, or in a setting where patients might 
require health care services, including acute care facilities, 
ambulatory care facilities, personal residences and other 
settings located in health professional shortage areas, 
medically underserved areas, or medically underserved 
populations, as recognized by the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services.". 

SEC. 5206. GRANTS FOR STATE AND LOCAL PROGRAMS. 

(a) In General. — Section 765(d) of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 295(d)) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (7), by striking "; or" and inserting a 
semicolon; 

(2) by redesignating paragraph (8) as paragraph (9); and 

June 9, 2010 



541 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5207 



(3) by inserting after paragraph (7) the following: 
"(8) public health workforce loan repayment programs; or", 
(b) Training for Mid-career Public Health Profes- 
sionals. — Part E of title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 294n et seq.), as amended by section 5204, is further 
amended by adding at the end the following: 

"SEC. 777 [42 U.S.C. 295f-2]. TRAINING FOR MID-CAREER PUBLIC AND 
ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONALS. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary may make grants to, or enter 
into contracts with, any eligible entity to award scholarships to eli- 
gible individuals to enroll in degree or professional training pro- 
grams for the purpose of enabling mid-career professionals in the 
public health and allied health workforce to receive additional 
training in the field of public health and allied health. 
"(b) Eligibility. — 

"(1) Eligible entity. — The term 'eligible entity' indicates 
an accredited educational institution that offers a course of 
study, certificate program, or professional training program in 
public or allied health or a related discipline, as determined by 
the Secretary 

"(2) Eligible individuals. — The term 'eligible individuals' 
includes those individuals employed in public and allied health 
positions at the Federal, State, tribal, or local level who are in- 
terested in retaining or upgrading their education. 
"(c) Authorization of Appropriations. — There is authorized 
to be appropriated to carry out this section, $60,000,000 for fiscal 
year 2010 and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal 
years 2011 through 2015. Fifty percent of appropriated funds shall 
be allotted to public health mid-career professionals and 50 percent 
shall be allotted to allied health mid-career professionals.". 

SEC. 5207. FUNDING FOR NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS. 

Section 338H(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
254q(a)) is amended to read as follows: 

"(a) Authorization of Appropriations. — For the purpose of 
carrying out this section, there is authorized to be appropriated, 
out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the 
following: 

"(1) For fiscal year 2010, $320,461,632. 

"(2) For fiscal year 2011, $414,095,394. 

"(3) For fiscal year 2012, $535,087,442. 

"(4) For fiscal year 2013, $691,431,432. 

"(5) For fiscal year 2014, $893,456,433. 

"(6) For fiscal year 2015, $1,154,510,336. 

"(7) For fiscal year 2016, and each subsequent fiscal year, 
the amount appropriated for the preceding fiscal year adjusted 
by the product of — 

"(A) one plus the average percentage increase in the 

costs of health professions education during the prior fiscal 

year; and 

"(B) one plus the average percentage change in the 
number of individuals residing in health professions short- 
age areas designated under section 333 during the prior 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5208 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



542 



fiscal year, relative to the number of individuals residing 
in such areas during the previous fiscal year.". 

SEC. 5208. NURSE-MANAGED HEALTH CLINICS. 

(a) Purpose. — The purpose of this section is to fund the devel- 
opment and operation of nurse-managed health clinics. 

(b) Grants. — Subpart 1 of part D of title III of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b et seq.) is amended by inserting 
after section 330A the following: 

"SEC. 330A-1 [42 U.S.C. 254c-la]. GRANTS TO NURSE-MANAGED 
HEALTH CLINICS. 

"(a) Definitions. — 

"(1) Comprehensive primary health care services. — In 
this section, the term 'comprehensive primary health care serv- 
ices' means the primary health services described in section 
330(b)(1). 

"(2) Nurse-managed health clinic. — The term 'nurse- 
managed health clinic' means a nurse-practice arrangement, 
managed by advanced practice nurses, that provides primary 
care or wellness services to underserved or vulnerable popu- 
lations and that is associated with a school, college, university 
or department of nursing, federally qualified health center, or 
independent nonprofit health or social services agency. 
"(b) Authority to Award Grants. — The Secretary shall 
award grants for the cost of the operation of nurse-managed health 
clinics that meet the requirements of this section. 

"(c) Applications. — To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section, an entity shall — 

"(1) be an NMHC; and 

"(2) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
in such manner, and containing — 

"(A) assurances that nurses are the major providers of 
services at the NMHC and that at least 1 advanced prac- 
tice nurse holds an executive management position within 
the organizational structure of the NMHC; 

"(B) an assurance that the NMHC will continue pro- 
viding comprehensive primary health care services or 
wellness services without regard to income or insurance 
status of the patient for the duration of the grant period; 
and 

"(C) an assurance that, not later than 90 days of re- 
ceiving a grant under this section, the NMHC will estab- 
lish a community advisory committee, for which a majority 
of the members shall be individuals who are served by the 
NMHC. 

"(d) Grant Amount. — The amount of any grant made under 
this section for any fiscal year shall be determined by the Sec- 
retary, taking into account — 

"(1) the financial need of the NMHC, considering State, 

local, and other operational funding provided to the NMHC; 

and 

"(2) other factors, as the Secretary determines appropriate. 
"(e) Authorization of Appropriations. — For the purposes of 
carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated 

June 9, 2010 



543 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5210\203 PHSA 



$50,000,000 for the fiscal year 2010 and such sums as may be nec- 
essary for each of the fiscal years 2011 through 2014.". 

SEC. 5209. ELIMINATION OF CAP ON COMMISSIONED CORPS. 

Section 202 of the Department of Health and Human Services 
Appropriations Act, 1993 (Public Law 102-394) is amended by 
striking "not to exceed 2,800". 

SEC. 5210. ESTABLISHING A READY RESERVE CORPS. 

Section 203 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 204) 
is amended to read as follows: 

"SEC. 203 [42 U.S.C. 204]. COMMISSIONED CORPS AND READY RESERVE 
CORPS. 

"(a) Establishment. — 

"(1) In general. — There shall be in the Service a commis- 
sioned Regular Corps and a Ready Reserve Corps for service 
in time of national emergency. 

"(2) Requirement. — All commissioned officers shall be citi- 
zens of the United States and shall be appointed without re- 
gard to the civil-service laws and compensated without regard 
to the Classification Act of 1923, as amended. 

"(3) Appointment. — Commissioned officers of the Ready 
Reserve Corps shall be appointed by the President and com- 
missioned officers of the Regular Corps shall be appointed by 
the President with the advice and consent of the Senate. 

"(4) Active duty. — Commissioned officers of the Ready Re- 
serve Corps shall at all times be subject to call to active duty 
by the Surgeon General, including active duty for the purpose 
of training. 

"(5) Warrant officers. — Warrant officers may be ap- 
pointed to the Service for the purpose of providing support to 
the health and delivery systems maintained by the Service and 
any warrant officer appointed to the Service shall be consid- 
ered for purposes of this Act and title 37, United States Code, 
to be a commissioned officer within the Commissioned Corps of 
the Service. 

"(b) Assimilating Reserve Corp Officers Into the Regular 
Corps. — Effective on the date of enactment of the Patient Protec- 
tion and Affordable Care Act, all individuals classified as officers 
in the Reserve Corps under this section (as such section existed on 
the day before the date of enactment of such Act) and serving on 
active duty shall be deemed to be commissioned officers of the Reg- 
ular Corps. 

"(c) Purpose and Use of Ready Research. — 

"(1) Purpose. — The purpose of the Ready Reserve Corps is 
to fulfill the need to have additional Commissioned Corps per- 
sonnel available on short notice (similar to the uniformed serv- 
ice's reserve program) to assist regular Commissioned Corps 
personnel to meet both routine public health and emergency 
response missions. 

"(2) Uses— The Ready Reserve Corps shall— 

"(A) participate in routine training to meet the general 
and specific needs of the Commissioned Corps; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5301 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



544 



"(B) be available and ready for involuntary calls to ac- 
tive duty during national emergencies and public health 
crises, similar to the uniformed service reserve personnel; 

"(C) be available for backfilling critical positions left 
vacant during deployment of active duty Commissioned 
Corps members, as well as for deployment to respond to 
public health emergencies, both foreign and domestic; and 
"(D) be available for service assignment in isolated, 
hardship, and medically underserved communities (as de- 
fined in section 799B) to improve access to health services. 
"(d) Funding. — For the purpose of carrying out the duties and 
responsibilities of the Commissioned Corps under this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for each of fis- 
cal years 2010 through 2014 for recruitment and training and 
$12,500,000 for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014 for the 
Ready Reserve Corps.". 

Subtitle D — Enhancing Health Care 
Workforce Education and Training 

SEC. 5301. TRAINING IN FAMILY MEDICINE, GENERAL INTERNAL MED- 
ICINE, GENERAL PEDIATRICS, AND PHYSICIAN 
ASSISTANTSHIP. 

Part C of title VII (42 U.S.C. 293k et seq.) is amended by strik- 
ing section 747 and inserting the following: 

"SEC. 747 [42 U.S.C. 293k]. PRIMARY CARE TRAINING AND ENHANCE- 
MENT. 

"(a) Support and Development of Primary Care Training 
Programs.— 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary may make grants to, or 
enter into contracts with, an accredited public or nonprofit pri- 
vate hospital, school of medicine or osteopathic medicine, aca- 
demically affiliated physician assistant training program, or a 
public or private nonprofit entity which the Secretary has de- 
termined is capable of carrying out such grant or contract — 

"(A) to plan, develop, operate, or participate in an ac- 
credited professional training program, including an ac- 
credited residency or internship program in the field of 
family medicine, general internal medicine, or general pe- 
diatrics for medical students, interns, residents, or prac- 
ticing physicians as defined by the Secretary; 

"(B) to provide need-based financial assistance in the 
form of traineeships and fellowships to medical students, 
interns, residents, practicing physicians, or other medical 
personnel, who are participants in any such program, and 
who plan to specialize or work in the practice of the fields 
defined in subparagraph (A); 

"(C) to plan, develop, and operate a program for the 
training of physicians who plan to teach in family medi- 
cine, general internal medicine, or general pediatrics train- 
ing programs; 

June 9, 2010 



545 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5301Y747 PHSA 



"(D) to plan, develop, and operate a program for the 
training of physicians teaching in community-based set- 
tings; 

"(E) to provide financial assistance in the form of 
traineeships and fellowships to physicians who are partici- 
pants in any such programs and who plan to teach or con- 
duct research in a family medicine, general internal medi- 
cine, or general pediatrics training program; 

"(F) to plan, develop, and operate a physician assistant 
education program, and for the training of individuals who 
will teach in programs to provide such training; 

"(G) to plan, develop, and operate a demonstration 
program that provides training in new competencies, as 
recommended by the Advisory Committee on Training in 
Primary Care Medicine and Dentistry and the National 
Health Care Workforce Commission established in section 
5101 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 
which may include — 

"(i) providing training to primary care physicians 
relevant to providing care through patient-centered 
medical homes (as defined by the Secretary for pur- 
poses of this section); 

"(ii) developing tools and curricula relevant to pa- 
tient-centered medical homes; and 

"(hi) providing continuing education to primary 
care physicians relevant to patient-centered medical 
homes; and 

"(H) to plan, develop, and operate joint degree pro- 
grams to provide interdisciplinary and interprofessional 
graduate training in public health and other health profes- 
sions to provide training in environmental health, infec- 
tious disease control, disease prevention and health pro- 
motion, epidemiological studies and injury control. 
"(2) Duration of awards. — The period during which pay- 
ments are made to an entity from an award of a grant or con- 
tract under this subsection shall be 5 years. 
"(b) Capacity Building in Primary Care. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary may make grants to or 
enter into contracts with accredited schools of medicine or os- 
teopathic medicine to establish, maintain, or improve — 

"(A) academic units or programs that improve clinical 
teaching and research in fields defined in subsection 
(a)(1)(A); or 

"(B) programs that integrate academic administrative 
units in fields defined in subsection (a)(1)(A) to enhance 
interdisciplinary recruitment, training, and faculty devel- 
opment. 

"(2) Preference in making awards under this sub- 
section. — In making awards of grants and contracts under 
paragraph (1), the Secretary shall give preference to any quali- 
fied applicant for such an award that agrees to expend the 
award for the purpose of — 

"(A) establishing academic units or programs in fields 

defined in subsection (a)(1)(A); or 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5301Y747 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



546 



"(B) substantially expanding such units or programs. 
"(3) Priorities in making awards. — In awarding grants or 
contracts under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall give priority 
to qualified applicants that— 

"(A) proposes a collaborative project between academic 
administrative units of primary care; 

"(B) proposes innovative approaches to clinical teach- 
ing using models of primary care, such as the patient cen- 
tered medical home, team management of chronic disease, 
and interprofessional integrated models of health care that 
incorporate transitions in health care settings and integra- 
tion physical and mental health provision; 

"(C) have a record of training the greatest percentage 
of providers, or that have demonstrated significant im- 
provements in the percentage of providers trained, who 
enter and remain in primary care practice; 

"(D) have a record of training individuals who are 
from underrepresented minority groups or from a rural or 
disadvantaged background; 

"(E) provide training in the care of vulnerable popu- 
lations such as children, older adults, homeless individ- 
uals, victims of abuse or trauma, individuals with mental 
health or substance-related disorders, individuals with 
HIV/AIDS, and individuals with disabilities; 

"(F) establish formal relationships and submit joint 
applications with federally qualified health centers, rural 
health clinics, area health education centers, or clinics lo- 
cated in underserved areas or that serve underserved pop- 
ulations; 

"(G) teach trainees the skills to provide interprofes- 
sional, integrated care through collaboration among health 
professionals; 

"(H) provide training in enhanced communication with 
patients, evidence-based practice, chronic disease manage- 
ment, preventive care, health information technology, or 
other competencies as recommended by the Advisory Com- 
mittee on Training in Primary Care Medicine and Den- 
tistry and the National Health Care Workforce Commis- 
sion established in section 5101 of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act; or 

"(I) provide training in cultural competency and health 
literacy. 

"(4) Duration of awards. — The period during which pay- 
ments are made to an entity from an award of a grant or con- 
tract under this subsection shall be 5 years. 
"(c) Authorization of Appropriations. — 

"(1) In general. — For purposes of carrying out this section 
(other than subsection (b)(1)(B)), there are authorized to be ap- 
propriated $125,000,000 for fiscal year 2010, and such sums as 
may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2011 through 2014. 

"(2) Training programs. — Fifteen percent of the amount 
appropriated pursuant to paragraph (1) in each such fiscal 
year shall be allocated to the physician assistant training pro- 
June 9, 2010 



547 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5302Y747A PHSA 



grams described in subsection (a)(1)(F), which prepare students 
for practice in primary care. 

"(3) Integrating academic administrative units. — For 
purposes of carrying out subsection (b)(1)(B), there are author- 
ized to be appropriated $750,000 for each of fiscal years 2010 
through 2014.". 

SEC. 5302. TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES FOR DIRECT CARE WORKERS. 

Part C of title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
293k et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 747, as amended 
by section 5301, the following: 

"SEC. 747A [42 U.S.C. 293k-l]. TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES FOR DIRECT 
CARE WORKERS. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary shall award grants to eligible 
entities to enable such entities to provide new training opportuni- 
ties for direct care workers who are employed in long-term care set- 
tings such as nursing homes (as defined in section 1908(e)(1) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396g(e)(l)), assisted living facilities 
and skilled nursing facilities, intermediate care facilities for indi- 
viduals with mental retardation, home and community based set- 
tings, and any other setting the Secretary determines to be appro- 
priate. 

"(b) Eligibility. — To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section, an entity shall — 

"(1) be an institution of higher education (as defined in 
section 102 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1002)) that— 

"(A) is accredited by a nationally recognized accred- 
iting agency or association listed under section 101(c) of 
the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001(c)); and 

"(B) has established a public-private educational part- 
nership with a nursing home or skilled nursing facility, 
agency or entity providing home and community based 
services to individuals with disabilities, or other long-term 
care provider; and 

"(2) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
in such manner, and containing such information as the Sec- 
retary may require. 

"(c) Use of Funds. — An eligible entity shall use amounts 
awarded under a grant under this section to provide assistance to 
eligible individuals to offset the cost of tuition and required fees for 
enrollment in academic programs provided by such entity. 
"(d) Eligible Individual. — 

"(1) Eligibility. — To be eligible for assistance under this 
section, an individual shall be enrolled in courses provided by 
a grantee under this subsection and maintain satisfactory aca- 
demic progress in such courses. 

"(2) Condition of assistance. — As a condition of receiv- 
ing assistance under this section, an individual shall agree 
that, following completion of the assistance period, the indi- 
vidual will work in the field of geriatrics, disability services, 
long term services and supports, or chronic care management 
for a minimum of 2 years under guidelines set by the Sec- 
retary. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5303 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



548 



"(e) Authorization of Appropriations. — There is authorized 
to be appropriated to carry out this section, $10,000,000 for the pe- 
riod of fiscal years 2011 through 2013.". 

SEC. 5303. TRAINING IN GENERAL, PEDIATRIC, AND PUBLIC HEALTH 
DENTISTRY. 

Part C of Title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
293k et seq.) is amended by — 

(1) redesignating section 748, as amended by section 5103 
of this Act, as section 749; and 

(2) inserting after section 747A, as added by section 5302, 
the following: 

"SEC. 748 [42 U.S.C. 293k-2]. TRAINING IN GENERAL, PEDIATRIC, AND 
PUBLIC HEALTH DENTISTRY. 

"(a) Support and Development of Dental Training Pro- 
grams. — 

"(1) In GENERAL. — The Secretary may make grants to, or 
enter into contracts with, a school of dentistry, public or non- 
profit private hospital, or a public or private nonprofit entity 
which the Secretary has determined is capable of carrying out 
such grant or contract — 

"(A) to plan, develop, and operate, or participate in, an 
approved professional training program in the field of gen- 
eral dentistry, pediatric dentistry, or public health den- 
tistry for dental students, residents, practicing dentists, 
dental hygienists, or other approved primary care dental 
trainees, that emphasizes training for general, pediatric, or 
public health dentistry; 

"(B) to provide financial assistance to dental students, 
residents, practicing dentists, and dental hygiene students 
who are in need thereof, who are participants in any such 
program, and who plan to work in the practice of general, 
pediatric, public heath dentistry, or dental hygiene; 

"(C) to plan, develop, and operate a program for the 
training of oral health care providers who plan to teach in 
general, pediatric, public health dentistry, or dental hy- 
giene; 

"(D) to provide financial assistance in the form of 
traineeships and fellowships to dentists who plan to teach 
or are teaching in general, pediatric, or public health den- 
tistry; 

"(E) to meet the costs of projects to establish, main- 
tain, or improve dental faculty development programs in 
primary care (which may be departments, divisions or 
other units); 

"(F) to meet the costs of projects to establish, main- 
tain, or improve predoctoral and postdoctoral training in 
primary care programs; 

"(G) to create a loan repayment program for faculty in 
dental programs; and 

"(H) to provide technical assistance to pediatric train- 
ing programs in developing and implementing instruction 
regarding the oral health status, dental care needs, and 

June 9, 2010 



549 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5303Y748 PHSA 



risk-based clinical disease management of all pediatric 
populations with an emphasis on underserved children. 
"(2) Faculty loan repayment. — 

"(A) In general. — A grant or contract under sub- 
section (a)(1)(G) may be awarded to a program of general, 
pediatric, or public health dentistry described in such sub- 
section to plan, develop, and operate a loan repayment pro- 
gram under which — 

"(i) individuals agree to serve full-time as faculty 
members; and 

"(ii) the program of general, pediatric or public 
health dentistry agrees to pay the principal and inter- 
est on the outstanding student loans of the individ- 
uals. 

"(B) Manner of payments. — With respect to the pay- 
ments described in subparagraph (A)(ii), upon completion 
by an individual of each of the first, second, third, fourth, 
and fifth years of service, the program shall pay an 
amount equal to 10, 15, 20, 25, and 30 percent, respec- 
tively, of the individual's student loan balance as cal- 
culated based on principal and interest owed at the initi- 
ation of the agreement. 
"(b) Eligible Entity. — For purposes of this subsection, entities 
eligible for such grants or contracts in general, pediatric, or public 
health dentistry shall include entities that have programs in dental 
or dental hygiene schools, or approved residency or advanced edu- 
cation programs in the practice of general, pediatric, or public 
health dentistry. Eligible entities may partner with schools of pub- 
lic health to permit the education of dental students, residents, and 
dental hygiene students for a master's year in public health at a 
school of public health. 

"(c) Priorities in Making Awards. — With respect to training 
provided for under this section, the Secretary shall give priority in 
awarding grants or contracts to the following: 

"(1) Qualified applicants that propose collaborative projects 
between departments of primary care medicine and depart- 
ments of general, pediatric, or public health dentistry. 

"(2) Qualified applicants that have a record of training the 
greatest percentage of providers, or that have demonstrated 
significant improvements in the percentage of providers, who 
enter and remain in general, pediatric, or public health den- 
tistry. 

"(3) Qualified applicants that have a record of training in- 
dividuals who are from a rural or disadvantaged background, 
or from underrepresented minorities. 

"(4) Qualified applicants that establish formal relation- 
ships with Federally qualified health centers, rural health cen- 
ters, or accredited teaching facilities and that conduct training 
of students, residents, fellows, or faculty at the center or facil- 
ity. 

"(5) Qualified applicants that conduct teaching programs 
targeting vulnerable populations such as older adults, home- 
less individuals, victims of abuse or trauma, individuals with 
mental health or substance-related disorders, individuals with 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5304 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



550 



disabilities, and individuals with HIV/AIDS, and in the risk- 
based clinical disease management of all populations. 

"(6) Qualified applicants that include educational activities 
in cultural competency and health literacy. 

"(7) Qualified applicants that have a high rate for placing 
graduates in practice settings that serve underserved areas or 
health disparity populations, or who achieve a significant in- 
crease in the rate of placing graduates in such settings. 

"(8) Qualified applicants that intend to establish a special 
populations oral health care education center or training pro- 
gram for the didactic and clinical education of dentists, dental 
health professionals, and dental hygienists who plan to teach 
oral health care for people with developmental disabilities, cog- 
nitive impairment, complex medical problems, significant phys- 
ical limitations, and vulnerable elderly. 

"(d) Application. — An eligible entity desiring a grant under 
this section shall submit to the Secretary an application at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Sec- 
retary may require. 

"(e) Duration of Award. — The period during which payments 
are made to an entity from an award of a grant or contract under 
subsection (a) shall be 5 years. The provision of such payments 
shall be subject to annual approval by the Secretary and subject to 
the availability of appropriations for the fiscal year involved to 
make the payments. 

"(f) Authorizations of Appropriations. — For the purpose of 
carrying out subsections (a) and (b), there is authorized to be ap- 
propriated $30,000,000 for fiscal year 2010 and such sums as may 
be necessary for each of fiscal years 2011 through 2015. 

"(g) Carryover Funds. — An entity that receives an award 
under this section may carry over funds from 1 fiscal year to an- 
other without obtaining approval from the Secretary. In no case 
may any funds be carried over pursuant to the preceding sentence 
for more than 3 years.". 

SEC. 5304. ALTERNATIVE DENTAL HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS DEM- 
ONSTRATION PROJECT. 

Subpart X of part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 256f et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing: 

"SEC. 340G-1 [42 U.S.C. 256g-l]. DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM. 

"(a) In General. — 

"(1) Authorization. — The Secretary is authorized to 
award grants to 15 eligible entities to enable such entities to 
establish a demonstration program to establish training pro- 
grams to train, or to employ, alternative dental health care 
providers in order to increase access to dental health care serv- 
ices in rural and other underserved communities. 

"(2) Definition. — The term 'alternative dental health care 
providers' includes community dental health coordinators, ad- 
vance practice dental hygienists, independent dental hygien- 
ists, supervised dental hygienists, primary care physicians, 
dental therapists, dental health aides, and any other health 
professional that the Secretary determines appropriate. 

June 9, 2010 



551 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5304\340G-1 PHSA 



"(b) Timeframe. — The demonstration projects funded under 
this section shall begin not later than 2 years after the date of en- 
actment of this section, and shall conclude not later than 7 years 
after such date of enactment. 

"(c) Eligible Entities. — To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall — 
"(1) be— 

"(A) an institution of higher education, including a 
community college; 

"(B) a public-private partnership; 

"(C) a federally qualified health center; 

"(D) an Indian Health Service facility or a tribe or 
tribal organization (as such terms are defined in section 4 
of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance 
Act); 

"(E) a State or county public health clinic, a health fa- 
cility operated by an Indian tribe or tribal organization, or 
urban Indian organization providing dental services; or 

"(F) a public hospital or health system; 
"(2) be within a program accredited by the Commission on 

Dental Accreditation or within a dental education program in 

an accredited institution; and 

"(3) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 

time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 

Secretary may require. 

"(d) Administrative Provisions. — 

"(1) Amount of grant. — Each grant under this section 

shall be in an amount that is not less than $4,000,000 for the 

5-year period during which the demonstration project being 

conducted. 

"(2) Disbursement of funds. — 

"(A) Preliminary disbursements. — Beginning 1 year 
after the enactment of this section, the Secretary may dis- 
perse to any entity receiving a grant under this section not 
more than 20 percent of the total funding awarded to such 
entity under such grant, for the purpose of enabling the 
entity to plan the demonstration project to be conducted 
under such grant. 

"(B) Subsequent disbursements. — The remaining 
amount of grant funds not dispersed under subparagraph 
(A) shall be dispersed such that not less than 15 percent 
of such remaining amount is dispersed each subsequent 
year. 

"(e) Compliance With State Requirements. — Each entity re- 
ceiving a grant under this section shall certify that it is in compli- 
ance with all applicable State licensing requirements. 

"(f) Evaluation. — The Secretary shall contract with the Direc- 
tor of the Institute of Medicine to conduct a study of the dem- 
onstration programs conducted under this section that shall pro- 
vide analysis, based upon quantitative and qualitative data, re- 
garding access to dental health care in the United States. 

"(g) Clarification Regarding Dental Health Aide Pro- 
gram. — Nothing in this section shall prohibit a dental health aide 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5305 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



552 



training program approved by the Indian Health Service from 
being eligible for a grant under this section. 

"(h) Authorization of Appropriations. — There is authorized 
to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this 
section.". 

SEC. 5305. GERIATRIC EDUCATION AND TRAINING; CAREER AWARDS; 
COMPREHENSD7E GERIATRIC EDUCATION. 

(a) Workforce Development; Career Awards. — Section 753 
of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 294c) is amended by 
adding at the end the following: 

"(d) Geriatric Workforce Development. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall award grants or 
contracts under this subsection to entities that operate a geri- 
atric education center pursuant to subsection (a)(1). 

"(2) Application. — To be eligible for an award under para- 
graph (1), an entity described in such paragraph shall submit 
to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, 
and containing such information as the Secretary may require. 

"(3) Use of funds. — Amounts awarded under a grant or 
contract under paragraph (1) shall be used to — 

"(A) carry out the fellowship program described in 
paragraph (4); and 

"(B) carry out 1 of the 2 activities described in para- 
graph (5). 

"(4) Fellowship program. — 

"(A) In general. — Pursuant to paragraph (3), a geri- 
atric education center that receives an award under this 
subsection shall use such funds to offer short-term inten- 
sive courses (referred to in this subsection as a 'fellowship') 
that focus on geriatrics, chronic care management, and 
long-term care that provide supplemental training for fac- 
ulty members in medical schools and other health profes- 
sions schools with programs in psychology, pharmacy, 
nursing, social work, dentistry, public health, allied health, 
or other health disciplines, as approved by the Secretary. 
Such a fellowship shall be open to current faculty, and ap- 
propriately credentialed volunteer faculty and practi- 
tioners, who do not have formal training in geriatrics, to 
upgrade their knowledge and clinical skills for the care of 
older adults and adults with functional limitations and to 
enhance their interdisciplinary teaching skills. 

"(B) Location. — A fellowship shall be offered either at 
the geriatric education center that is sponsoring the 
course, in collaboration with other geriatric education cen- 
ters, or at medical schools, schools of dentistry, schools of 
nursing, schools of pharmacy, schools of social work, grad- 
uate programs in psychology, or allied health and other 
health professions schools approved by the Secretary with 
which the geriatric education centers are affiliated. 

"(C) CME credit. — Participation in a fellowship under 
this paragraph shall be accepted with respect to complying 
with continuing health profession education requirements. 
As a condition of such acceptance, the recipient shall agree 
to subsequently provide a minimum of 18 hours of vol- 

June 9, 2010 



553 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5305 



untary instructional support through a geriatric education 
center that is providing clinical training to students or 
trainees in long-term care settings. 

"(5) Additional required activities described. — Pursu- 
ant to paragraph (3), a geriatric education center that receives 
an award under this subsection shall use such funds to carry 
out 1 of the following 2 activities. 

"(A) Family caregiver and direct care provider 
training. — A geriatric education center that receives an 
award under this subsection shall offer at least 2 courses 
each year, at no charge or nominal cost, to family care- 
givers and direct care providers that are designed to pro- 
vide practical training for supporting frail elders and indi- 
viduals with disabilities. The Secretary shall require such 
Centers to work with appropriate community partners to 
develop training program content and to publicize the 
availability of training courses in their service areas. All 
family caregiver and direct care provider training pro- 
grams shall include instruction on the management of psy- 
chological and behavioral aspects of dementia, communica- 
tion techniques for working with individuals who have de- 
mentia, and the appropriate, safe, and effective use of 
medications for older adults. 

"(B) Incorporation of best practices. — A geriatric 
education center that receives an award under this sub- 
section shall develop and include material on depression 
and other mental disorders common among older adults, 
medication safety issues for older adults, and management 
of the psychological and behavioral aspects of dementia 
and communication techniques with individuals who have 
dementia in all training courses, where appropriate. 
"(6) Targets. — A geriatric education center that receives 
an award under this subsection shall meet targets approved by 
the Secretary for providing geriatric training to a certain num- 
ber of faculty or practitioners during the term of the award, as 
well as other parameters established by the Secretary. 

"(7) Amount of award. — An award under this subsection 
shall be in an amount of $150,000. Not more than 24 geriatric 
education centers may receive an award under this subsection. 

"(8) Maintenance of effort. — A geriatric education cen- 
ter that receives an award under this subsection shall provide 
assurances to the Secretary that funds provided to the geriatric 
education center under this subsection will be used only to 
supplement, not to supplant, the amount of Federal, State, and 
local funds otherwise expended by the geriatric education cen- 
ter. 

"(9) Authorization of appropriations. — In addition to 
any other funding available to carry out this section, there is 
authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, 
$10,800,000 for the period of fiscal year 2011 through 2014. 
"(e) Geriatric Career Incentive Awards. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall award grants or 
contracts under this section to individuals described in para- 
graph (2) to foster greater interest among a variety of health 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5305 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



554 



professionals in entering the field of geriatrics, long-term care, 

and chronic care management. 

"(2) Eligible individuals. — To be eligible to received an 

award under paragraph (1), an individual shall — 

"(A) be an advanced practice nurse, a clinical social 
worker, a pharmacist, or student of psychology who is pur- 
suing a doctorate or other advanced degree in geriatrics or 
related fields in an accredited health professions school; 
and 

"(B) submit to the Secretary an application at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
the Secretary may require. 

"(3) Condition of award. — As a condition of receiving an 
award under this subsection, an individual shall agree that, 
following completion of the award period, the individual will 
teach or practice in the field of geriatrics, long-term care, or 
chronic care management for a minimum of 5 years under 
guidelines set by the Secretary. 

"(4) Authorization of appropriations. — There is author- 
ized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, 
$10,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2011 through 2013.". 
(b) Expansion of Eligibility for Geriatric Academic Ca- 
reer Awards; Payment to Institution. — Section 753(c) of the 
Public Health Service Act 294(c)) is amended — 

(1) by redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5) as paragraphs 
(5) and (6), respectively; 

(2) by striking paragraph (2) through paragraph (3) and in- 
serting the following: 

"(2) Eligible individuals. — To be eligible to receive an 
Award under paragraph (1), an individual shall — 

"(A) be board certified or board eligible in internal 
medicine, family practice, psychiatry, or licensed dentistry, 
or have completed any required training in a discipline 
and employed in an accredited health professions school 
that is approved by the Secretary; 

"(B) have completed an approved fellowship program 
in geriatrics or have completed specialty training in geri- 
atrics as required by the discipline and any addition geri- 
atrics training as required by the Secretary; and 

"(C) have a junior (non-tenured) faculty appointment 
at an accredited (as determined by the Secretary) school of 
medicine, osteopathic medicine, nursing, social work, psy- 
chology, dentistry, pharmacy, or other allied health dis- 
ciplines in an accredited health professions school that is 
approved by the Secretary. 

"(3) Limitations. — No Award under paragraph (1) may be 
made to an eligible individual unless the individual — 

"(A) has submitted to the Secretary an application, at 
such time, in such manner, and containing such informa- 
tion as the Secretary may require, and the Secretary has 
approved such application; 

"(B) provides, in such form and manner as the Sec- 
retary may require, assurances that the individual will 

June 9, 2010 



555 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5306 



meet the service requirement described in paragraph (6); 
and 

"(C) provides, in such form and manner as the Sec- 
retary may require, assurances that the individual has a 
full-time faculty appointment in a health professions insti- 
tution and documented commitment from such institution 
to spend 75 percent of the total time of such individual on 
teaching and developing skills in interdisciplinary edu- 
cation in geriatrics. 

"(4) Maintenance of effort. — An eligible individual that 
receives an Award under paragraph (1) shall provide assur- 
ances to the Secretary that funds provided to the eligible indi- 
vidual under this subsection will be used only to supplement, 
not to supplant, the amount of Federal, State, and local funds 
otherwise expended by the eligible individual."; and 

(3) in paragraph (5), as so designated — 

(A) in subparagraph (A) — 

(i) by inserting "for individuals who are physi- 
cians" after "this section"; and 

(ii) by inserting after the period at the end the fol- 
lowing: "The Secretary shall determine the amount of 
an Award under this section for individuals who are 
not physicians."; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following: 

"(C) Payment to institution. — The Secretary shall 
make payments to institutions which include schools of 
medicine, osteopathic medicine, nursing, social work, psy- 
chology, dentistry, and pharmacy, or other allied health 
discipline in an accredited health professions school that is 
approved by the Secretary.", 
(c) Comprehensive Geriatric Education. — Section 855 of the 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 298) is amended— 

(1) in subsection (b) — 

(A) in paragraph (3), by striking "or" at the end; 

(B) in paragraph (4), by striking the period and insert- 
ing "; or"; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following: 

"(5) establish traineeships for individuals who are pre- 
paring for advanced education nursing degrees in geriatric 
nursing, long-term care, gero-psychiatric nursing or other nurs- 
ing areas that specialize in the care of the elderly population."; 
and 

(2) in subsection (e), by striking "2003 through 2007" and 
inserting "2010 through 2014". 

SEC. 5306. MENTAL AND BEHAVIORAL HEALTH EDUCATION AND 
TRAINING GRANTS. 

(a) In General.— Part D of title VII (42 U.S.C. 294 et seq.) is 
amended by — 

(1) striking section 757; 

(2) redesignating section 756 (as amended by section 5103) 
as section 757; and 

(3) inserting after section 755 the following: 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5306Y756 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



556 



"SEC. 756 [42 U.S.C. 294e-l]. MENTAL AND BEHAVIORAL HEALTH EDU- 
CATION AND TRAINING GRANTS. 

"(a) Grants Authorized. — The Secretary may award grants to 
eligible institutions of higher education to support the recruitment 
of students for, and education and clinical experience of the stu- 
dents in — 

"(1) baccalaureate, master's, and doctoral degree programs 
of social work, as well as the development of faculty in social 
work; 

"(2) accredited master's, doctoral, internship, and post-doc- 
toral residency programs of psychology for the development 
and implementation of interdisciplinary training of psychology 
graduate students for providing behavioral and mental health 
services, including substance abuse prevention and treatment 
services; 

"(3) accredited institutions of higher education or accred- 
ited professional training programs that are establishing or ex- 
panding internships or other field placement programs in child 
and adolescent mental health in psychiatry, psychology, school 
psychology, behavioral pediatrics, psychiatric nursing, social 
work, school social work, substance abuse prevention and 
treatment, marriage and family therapy, school counseling, or 
professional counseling; and 

"(4) State-licensed mental health nonprofit and for-profit 
organizations to enable such organizations to pay for programs 
for preservice or in-service training of paraprofessional child 
and adolescent mental health workers. 

"(b) Eligibility Requirements. — To be eligible for a grant 
under this section, an institution shall demonstrate — 

"(1) participation in the institutions' programs of individ- 
uals and groups from different racial, ethnic, cultural, geo- 
graphic, religious, linguistic, and class backgrounds, and dif- 
ferent genders and sexual orientations; 

"(2) knowledge and understanding of the concerns of the 
individuals and groups described in subsection (a); 

"(3) any internship or other field placement program as- 
sisted under the grant will prioritize cultural and linguistic 
competency; 

"(4) the institution will provide to the Secretary such data, 
assurances, and information as the Secretary may require; and 

"(5) with respect to any violation of the agreement between 
the Secretary and the institution, the institution will pay such 
liquidated damages as prescribed by the Secretary by regula- 
tion. 

"(c) Institutional Requirement. — For grants authorized 
under subsection (a)(1), at least 4 of the grant recipients shall be 
historically black colleges or universities or other minority-serving 
institutions. 

"(d) Priority. — 

"(1) In selecting the grant recipients in social work under 

subsection (a)(1), the Secretary shall give priority to applicants 

that— 

"(A) are accredited by the Council on Social Work Edu- 
cation; 

June 9, 2010 



557 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5306 



"(B) have a graduation rate of not less than 80 percent 
for social work students; and 

"(C) exhibit an ability to recruit social workers from 
and place social workers in areas with a high need and 
high demand population. 

"(2) In selecting the grant recipients in graduate psy- 
chology under subsection (a)(2), the Secretary shall give pri- 
ority to institutions in which training focuses on the needs of 
vulnerable groups such as older adults and children, individ- 
uals with mental health or substance-related disorders, victims 
of abuse or trauma and of combat stress disorders such as 
posttraumatic stress disorder and traumatic brain injuries, 
homeless individuals, chronically ill persons, and their fami- 
lies. 

"(3) In selecting the grant recipients in training programs 
in child and adolescent mental health under subsections (a)(3) 
and (a)(4), the Secretary shall give priority to applicants that — 
"(A) have demonstrated the ability to collect data on 
the number of students trained in child and adolescent 
mental health and the populations served by such students 
after graduation or completion of preservice or in-service 
training; 

"(B) have demonstrated familiarity with evidence- 
based methods in child and adolescent mental health serv- 
ices, including substance abuse prevention and treatment 
services; 

"(C) have programs designed to increase the number of 
professionals and paraprofessionals serving high-priority 
populations and to applicants who come from high-priority 
communities and plan to serve medically underserved pop- 
ulations, in health professional shortage areas, or in medi- 
cally underserved areas; 

"(D) offer curriculum taught collaboratively with a 
family on the consumer and family lived experience or the 
importance of family-professional or family-paraprofes- 
sional partnerships; and 

"(E) provide services through a community mental 
health program described in section 1913(b)(1). 
"(e) Authorization of Appropriation. — For the fiscal years 
2010 through 2013, there is authorized to be appropriated to carry 
out this section — 

"(1) $8,000,000 for training in social work in subsection 

(a) (1); 

"(2) $12,000,000 for training in graduate psychology in 
subsection (a)(2), of which not less than $10,000,000 shall be 
allocated for doctoral, postdoctoral, and internship level train- 
ing; 

"(3) $10,000,000 for training in professional child and ado- 
lescent mental health in subsection (a)(3); and 

"(4) $5,000,000 for training in paraprofessional child and 
adolescent work in subsection (a)(4).". 

(b) Conforming Amendments. — Section 757(b)(2) of the Public 
Health Service Act, as redesignated by subsection (a), is amended 
by striking "sections 751(a)(1)(A), 751(a)(1)(B), 753(b), 754(3)(A), 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5307 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



558 



and 755(b)" and inserting "sections 751(b)(1)(A), 753(b), and 
755(b)". 

SEC. 5307. CULTURAL COMPETENCY, PREVENTION, AND PUBLIC 
HEALTH AND INDP7IDUALS WITH DISABILITIES TRAIN- 
ING. 

(a) Title VII.— Section 741 of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 293e) is amended— 

(1) in subsection (a) — 

(A) by striking the subsection heading and inserting 
"Cultural Competency, Prevention, and Public 
Health and Individuals With Disability Grants"; and 

(B) in paragraph (1), by striking "for the purpose of 
and all that follows through the period at the end and in- 
serting "for the development, evaluation, and dissemina- 
tion of research, demonstration projects, and model cur- 
ricula for cultural competency, prevention, public health 
proficiency, reducing health disparities, and aptitude for 
working with individuals with disabilities training for use 
in health professions schools and continuing education pro- 
grams, and for other purposes determined as appropriate 
by the Secretary."; and 

(2) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following: 
"(b) Collaboration. — In carrying out subsection (a), the Sec- 
retary shall collaborate with health professional societies, licensing 
and accreditation entities, health professions schools, and experts 
in minority health and cultural competency, prevention, and public 
health and disability groups, community-based organizations, and 
other organizations as determined appropriate by the Secretary. 
The Secretary shall coordinate with curricula and research and 
demonstration projects developed under section 807. 

"(c) DISSEMINATION. — 

"(1) In general. — Model curricula developed under this 
section shall be disseminated through the Internet Clearing- 
house under section 270 and such other means as determined 
appropriate by the Secretary. 

"(2) Evaluation. — The Secretary shall evaluate the adop- 
tion and the implementation of cultural competency, preven- 
tion, and public health, and working with individuals with a 
disability training curricula, and the facilitate inclusion of 
these competency measures in quality measurement systems 
as appropriate. 

"(d) Authorization of Appropriations. — There is authorized 
to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be 
necessary for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2015.". 

(b) Title VIII.— Section 807 of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 296e-l) is amended— 

(1) in subsection (a) — 

(A) by striking the subsection heading and inserting 
"Cultural Competency, Prevention, and Public 
Health and Individuals With Disability Grants"; and 

(B) by striking "for the purpose of and all that follows 
through "health care." and inserting "for the development, 
evaluation, and dissemination of research, demonstration 
projects, and model curricula for cultural competency, pre- 

June 9, 2010 



559 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5309 



vention, public health proficiency, reducing health dispari- 
ties, and aptitude for working with individuals with dis- 
abilities training for use in health professions schools and 
continuing education programs, and for other purposes de- 
termined as appropriate by the Secretary."; and 

(2) by redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (d); 

(3) by inserting after subsection (a) the following: 

"(b) Collaboration. — In carrying out subsection (a), the Sec- 
retary shall collaborate with the entities described in section 
741(b). The Secretary shall coordinate with curricula and research 
and demonstration projects developed under such section 741. 

"(c) Dissemination. — Model curricula developed under this sec- 
tion shall be disseminated and evaluated in the same manner as 
model curricula developed under section 741, as described in sub- 
section (c) of such section."; and 

(4) in subsection (d), as so redesignated — 

(A) by striking "subsection (a)" and inserting "this sec- 
tion"; and 

(B) by striking "2001 through 2004" and inserting 
"2010 through 2015". 

SEC. 5308. ADVANCED NURSING EDUCATION GRANTS. 

Section 811 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 296j) 
is amended — 

(1) in subsection (c) — 

(A) in the subsection heading, by striking "and Nurse 
Midwifery Programs"; and 

(B) by striking "and nurse midwifery"; 

(2) in subsection (f) — 

(A) by striking paragraph (2); and 

(B) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2); 

and 

(3) by redesignating subsections (d), (e), and (f) as sub- 
sections (e), (f), and (g), respectively; and 

(4) by inserting after subsection (c), the following: 

"(d) Authorized Nurse-midwifery Programs. — Midwifery 
programs that are eligible for support under this section are edu- 
cational programs that — 

"(1) have as their objective the education of midwives; and 
"(2) are accredited by the American College of Nurse-Mid- 
wives Accreditation Commission for Midwifery Education.". 

SEC. 5309. NURSE EDUCATION, PRACTICE, AND RETENTION GRANTS. 

(a) In General. — Section 831 of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 296p) is amended— 

(1) in the section heading, by striking "RETENTION" and 
inserting "QUALITY"; 

(2) in subsection (a) — 

(A) in paragraph (1), by adding "or" after the semi- 
colon; 

(B) by striking paragraph (2); and 

(C) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2); 

(3) in subsection (b)(3), by striking "managed care, quality 
improvement" and inserting "coordinated care"; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5309\831A PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



560 



(4) in subsection (g), by inserting ", as defined in section 
801(2)," after "school of nursing"; and 

(5) in subsection (h), by striking "2003 through 2007" and 
inserting "2010 through 2014". 

(b) Nurse Retention Grants. — Title VIII of the Public Health 
Service Act is amended by inserting after section 831 (42 U.S.C. 
296b) the following: 

"SEC. 831A [42 U.S.C. 296p-l]. NURSE RETENTION GRANTS. 

"(a) Retention Priority Areas. — The Secretary may award 
grants to, and enter into contracts with, eligible entities to enhance 
the nursing workforce by initiating and maintaining nurse reten- 
tion programs pursuant to subsection (b) or (c). 

"(b) Grants for Career Ladder Program. — The Secretary 
may award grants to, and enter into contracts with, eligible entities 
for programs — 

"(1) to promote career advancement for individuals includ- 
ing licensed practical nurses, licensed vocational nurses, cer- 
tified nurse assistants, home health aides, diploma degree or 
associate degree nurses, to become baccalaureate prepared reg- 
istered nurses or advanced education nurses in order to meet 
the needs of the registered nurse workforce; 

"(2) developing and implementing internships and resi- 
dency programs in collaboration with an accredited school of 
nursing, as denned by section 801(2), to encourage mentoring 
and the development of specialties; or 

"(3) to assist individuals in obtaining education and train- 
ing required to enter the nursing profession and advance with- 
in such profession. 

"(c) Enhancing Patient Care Delivery Systems. — 

"(1) Grants. — The Secretary may award grants to eligible 
entities to improve the retention of nurses and enhance patient 
care that is directly related to nursing activities by enhancing 
collaboration and communication among nurses and other 
health care professionals, and by promoting nurse involvement 
in the organizational and clinical decision-making processes of 
a health care facility. 

"(2) Priority. — In making awards of grants under this 
subsection, the Secretary shall give preference to applicants 
that have not previously received an award under this sub- 
section (or section 831(c) as such section existed on the day be- 
fore the date of enactment of this section). 

"(3) Continuation of an award. — The Secretary shall 
make continuation of any award under this subsection beyond 
the second year of such award contingent on the recipient of 
such award having demonstrated to the Secretary measurable 
and substantive improvement in nurse retention or patient 
care. 

"(d) Other Priority Areas. — The Secretary may award grants 
to, or enter into contracts with, eligible entities to address other 
areas that are of high priority to nurse retention, as determined by 
the Secretary. 

"(e) Report. — The Secretary shall submit to the Congress be- 
fore the end of each fiscal year a report on the grants awarded and 

June 9, 2010 



561 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5311 



the contracts entered into under this section. Each such report 
shall identify the overall number of such grants and contracts and 
provide an explanation of why each such grant or contract will 
meet the priority need of the nursing workforce. 

"(f) Eligible Entity. — For purposes of this section, the term 
'eligible entity' includes an accredited school of nursing, as defined 
by section 801(2), a health care facility, or a partnership of such 
a school and facility. 

"(g) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are author- 
ized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may 
be necessary for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2012.". 

SEC. 5310. LOAN REPAYMENT AND SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM. 

(a) Loan Repayments and Scholarships. — Section 846(a)(3) 
of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 297n(a)(3)) is amended 
by inserting before the semicolon the following: ", or in a accredited 
school of nursing, as defined by section 801(2), as nurse faculty". 

(b) Technical and Conforming Amendments. — Title VIII (42 
U.S.C. 296 et seq.) is amended — 

(1) by redesignating section 810 (relating to prohibition 
against discrimination by schools on the basis of sex) as section 
809 and moving such section so that it follows section 808; 

(2) in sections 835, 836, 838, 840, and 842, by striking the 
term "this subpart" each place it appears and inserting "this 
part"; 

(3) in section 836(h), by striking the last sentence; 

(4) in section 836, by redesignating subsection (1) as sub- 
section (k); 

(5) in section 839, by striking "839" and all that follows 
through "(a)" and inserting "839. (a)"; 

(6) in section 835(b), by striking "841" each place it ap- 
pears and inserting "871"; 

(7) by redesignating section 841 as section 871, moving 
part F to the end of the title, and redesignating such part as 
part I; 

(8) in part G— 

(A) by redesignating section 845 as section 851; and 

(B) by redesignating part G as part F; 

(9) in part H— 

(A) by redesignating sections 851 and 852 as sections 
861 and 862, respectively; and 

(B) by redesignating part H as part G; and 

(10) in part I — 

(A) by redesignating section 855, as amended by sec- 
tion 5305, as section 865; and 

(B) by redesignating part I as part H. 

SEC. 5311. NURSE FACULTY LOAN PROGRAM. 

(a) In General. — Section 846A of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 297n-l) is amended— 
(1) in subsection (a) — 

(A) in the subsection heading, by striking "Establish- 
ment" and inserting "School of Nursing Student Loan 
Fund"; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5311X847 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



562 



(B) by inserting "accredited" after "agreement with 
any"; 

(2) in subsection (c) — 

(A) in paragraph (2), by striking "$30,000" and all that 
follows through the semicolon and inserting "$35,500, dur- 
ing fiscal years 2010 and 2011 fiscal years (after fiscal 
year 2011, such amounts shall be adjusted to provide for 
a cost-of-attendance increase for the yearly loan rate and 
the aggregate loan;"; and 

(B) in paragraph (3)(A), by inserting "an accredited" 
after "faculty member in"; 

(3) in subsection (e), by striking "a school" and inserting 
"an accredited school"; and 

(4) in subsection (f), by striking "2003 through 2007" and 
inserting "2010 through 2014". 

(b) Eligible Individual Student Loan Repayment. — Title 
VIII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting after 
section 846A (42 U.S.C. 297n-l) the following: 

"SEC. 847 [42 U.S.C. 297o]. ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL STUDENT LOAN RE- 
PAYMENT. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary, acting through the Adminis- 
trator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, may 
enter into an agreement with eligible individuals for the repayment 
of education loans, in accordance with this section, to increase the 
number of qualified nursing faculty. 

"(b) Agreements. — Each agreement entered into under this 
subsection shall require that the eligible individual shall serve as 
a full-time member of the faculty of an accredited school of nursing, 
for a total period, in the aggregate, of at least 4 years during the 
6-year period beginning on the later of — 

"(1) the date on which the individual receives a master's 
or doctorate nursing degree from an accredited school of nurs- 
ing; or 

"(2) the date on which the individual enters into an agree- 
ment under this subsection. 

"(c) Agreement Provisions. — Agreements entered into pursu- 
ant to subsection (b) shall be entered into on such terms and condi- 
tions as the Secretary may determine, except that — 

"(1) not more than 10 months after the date on which the 
6-year period described under subsection (b) begins, but in no 
case before the individual starts as a full-time member of the 
faculty of an accredited school of nursing the Secretary shall 
begin making payments, for and on behalf of that individual, 
on the outstanding principal of, and interest on, any loan of 
that individual obtained to pay for such degree; 

"(2) for an individual who has completed a master's in 
nursing or equivalent degree in nursing — 

"(A) payments may not exceed $10,000 per calendar 
year; and 

"(B) total payments may not exceed $40,000 during 
the 2010 and 2011 fiscal years (after fiscal year 2011, such 
amounts shall be adjusted to provide for a cost-of-attend- 
ance increase for the yearly loan rate and the aggregate 
loan); and 

June 9, 2010 



563 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5312 



"(3) for an individual who has completed a doctorate or 
equivalent degree in nursing — 

"(A) payments may not exceed $20,000 per calendar 
year; and 

"(B) total payments may not exceed $80,000 during 
the 2010 and 2011 fiscal years (adjusted for subsequent 
fiscal years as provided for in the same manner as in para- 
graph (2KB)). 
"(d) Breach of Agreement. — 

"(1) In general. — In the case of any agreement made 
under subsection (b), the individual is liable to the Federal 
Government for the total amount paid by the Secretary under 
such agreement, and for interest on such amount at the max- 
imum legal prevailing rate, if the individual fails to meet the 
agreement terms required under such subsection. 

"(2) Waiver or suspension of liability. — In the case of 
an individual making an agreement for purposes of paragraph 

(1) , the Secretary shall provide for the waiver or suspension of 
liability under such paragraph if compliance by the individual 
with the agreement involved is impossible or would involve ex- 
treme hardship to the individual or if enforcement of the agree- 
ment with respect to the individual would be unconscionable. 

"(3) Date certain for recovery. — Subject to paragraph 

(2) , any amount that the Federal Government is entitled to re- 
cover under paragraph (1) shall be paid to the United States 
not later than the expiration of the 3-year period beginning on 
the date the United States becomes so entitled. 

"(4) Availability. — Amounts recovered under paragraph 
(1) shall be available to the Secretary for making loan repay- 
ments under this section and shall remain available for such 
purpose until expended. 

"(e) Eligible Individual Defined. — For purposes of this sec- 
tion, the term 'eligible individual' means an individual who — 

"(1) is a United States citizen, national, or lawful perma- 
nent resident; 

"(2) holds an unencumbered license as a registered nurse; 

and 

"(3) has either already completed a master's or doctorate 
nursing program at an accredited school of nursing or is cur- 
rently enrolled on a full-time or part-time basis in such a pro- 
gram. 

"(f) Priority. — For the purposes of this section and section 
846A, funding priority will be awarded to School of Nursing Stu- 
dent Loans that support doctoral nursing students or Individual 
Student Loan Repayment that support doctoral nursing students. 

"(g) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are author- 
ized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may 
be necessary for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014.". 

SEC. 5312. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR PARTS B 
THROUGH D OF TITLE VIII. 

Section 871 of the Public Health Service Act, as redesignated 
and moved by section 5310, is amended to read as follows: 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5312N871 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



564 



"SEC. 871 [42 U.S.C. 298d]. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS. 

"For the purpose of carrying out parts B, C, and D (subject to 
section 851(g)), there are authorized to be appropriated 
$338,000,000 for fiscal year 2010, and such sums as may be nec- 
essary for each of the fiscal years 2011 through 2016.". 

SEC. 5313. GRANTS TO PROMOTE THE COMMUNITY HEALTH WORK- 
FORCE. 

(a) In General. — Part P of title III of the Public Health Serv- 
ice Act (42 U.S.C. 280g et seq.) is amended by adding at the end 
the following: 

"SEC. 399V [42 U.S.C. 280g-ll]. GRANTS TO PROMOTE POSnTVE 
HEALTH BEHAVIORS AND OUTCOMES. 

"(a) Grants Authorized. — The Director of the Centers for Dis- 
ease Control and Prevention, in collaboration with the Secretary, 
shall award grants to eligible entities to promote positive health 
behaviors and outcomes for populations in medically underserved 
communities through the use of community health workers. 

"(b) Use of Funds. — Grants awarded under subsection (a) 
shall be used to support community health workers — 

"(1) to educate, guide, and provide outreach in a commu- 
nity setting regarding health problems prevalent in medically 
underserved communities, particularly racial and ethnic minor- 
ity populations; 

"(2) to educate and provide guidance regarding effective 
strategies to promote positive health behaviors and discourage 
risky health behaviors; 

"(3) to educate and provide outreach regarding enrollment 
in health insurance including the Children's Health Insurance 
Program under title XXI of the Social Security Act, Medicare 
under title XVIII of such Act and Medicaid under title XIX of 
such Act; 

"(4) to identify and refer underserved populations to appro- 
priate healthcare agencies and community-based programs and 
organizations in order to increase access to quality healthcare 
services and to eliminate duplicative care; or [As revised by 
section 10501(c)(l)~\ 

"(5) to educate, guide, and provide home visitation services 
regarding maternal health and prenatal care. 
"(c) Application. — Each eligible entity that desires to receive 
a grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Sec- 
retary, at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such in- 
formation as the Secretary may require. 

"(d) Priority. — In awarding grants under subsection (a), the 
Secretary shall give priority to applicants that — 
"(1) propose to target geographic areas — 

"(A) with a high percentage of residents who are eligi- 
ble for health insurance but are uninsured or under- 
insured; 

"(B) with a high percentage of residents who suffer 
from chronic diseases; or 

"(C) with a high infant mortality rate; 
"(2) have experience in providing health or health-related 
social services to individuals who are underserved with respect 
to such services; and 

June 9, 2010 



565 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5313\399V PHSA 



"(3) have documented community activity and experience 
with community health workers. 

"(e) Collaboration With Academic Institutions and the 
One-stop Delivery System. — The Secretary shall encourage com- 
munity health worker programs receiving funds under this section 
to collaborate with academic institutions and one-stop delivery sys- 
tems under section 134(c) of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require such collabora- 
tion. 

"(f) Evidence-based Interventions. — The Secretary shall en- 
courage community health worker programs receiving funding 
under this section to implement a process or an outcome-based pay- 
ment system that rewards community health workers for con- 
necting underserved populations with the most appropriate serv- 
ices at the most appropriate time. Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to require such a payment. 

"(g) Quality Assurance and Cost Effectiveness. — The Sec- 
retary shall establish guidelines for assuring the quality of the 
training and supervision of community health workers under the 
programs funded under this section and for assuring the cost-effec- 
tiveness of such programs. 

"(h) Monitoring. — The Secretary shall monitor community 
health worker programs identified in approved applications under 
this section and shall determine whether such programs are in 
compliance with the guidelines established under subsection (g). 

"(i) Technical Assistance. — The Secretary may provide tech- 
nical assistance to community health worker programs identified in 
approved applications under this section with respect to planning, 
developing, and operating programs under the grant. 

"(j) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are authorized 
to be appropriated, such sums as may be necessary to carry out 
this section for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014. 
"(k) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(1) Community health worker. — The term 'community 
health worker' means an individual who promotes health or 
nutrition within the community in which the individual re- 
sides — [As revised by section 10501(c)(2)~\ 

"(A) by serving as a liaison between communities and 
healthcare agencies; 

"(B) by providing guidance and social assistance to 
community residents; 

"(C) by enhancing community residents' ability to ef- 
fectively communicate with healthcare providers; 

"(D) by providing culturally and linguistically appro- 
priate health or nutrition education; 

"(E) by advocating for individual and community 
health; 

"(F) by providing referral and follow-up services or 
otherwise coordinating care; and 

"(G) by proactively identifying and enrolling eligible 
individuals in Federal, State, local, private or nonprofit 
health and human services programs. 

"(2) Community setting. — The term 'community setting" 
means a home or a community organization located in the 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5314 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



566 



neighborhood in which a participant in the program under this 
section resides. 

"(3) Eligible entity. — The term 'eligible entity' means a 
public or nonprofit private entity (including a State or public 
subdivision of a State, a public health department, a free 
health clinic, a hospital, or a Federally-qualified health center 
(as defined in section 1861(aa) of the Social Security Act)), or 
a consortium of any such entities. 

"(4) Medically underserved community. — The term 
'medically underserved community' means a community identi- 
fied by a State — 

"(A) that has a substantial number of individuals who 
are members of a medically underserved population, as de- 
fined by section 330(b)(3); and 

"(B) a significant portion of which is a health profes- 
sional shortage area as designated under section 332.". 

SEC. 5314. FELLOWSHIP TRAINING IN PUBLIC HEALTH. 

Part E of title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
294n et seq.), as amended by section 5206, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following: 

"SEC. 778 [42 U.S.C. 295f-3]. FELLOWSHIP TRAINING IN APPLIED PUB- 
LIC HEALTH EPIDEMIOLOGY, PUBLIC HEALTH LABORA- 
TORY SCIENCE, PUBLIC HEALTH INFORMATICS, AND EX- 
PANSION OF THE EPIDEMIC INTELLIGENCE SERVICE. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary may carry out activities to 
address documented workforce shortages in State and local health 
departments in the critical areas of applied public health epidemi- 
ology and public health laboratory science and informatics and may 
expand the Epidemic Intelligence Service. 

"(b) Specific Uses. — In carrying out subsection (a), the Sec- 
retary shall provide for the expansion of existing fellowship pro- 
grams operated through the Centers for Disease Control and Pre- 
vention in a manner that is designed to alleviate shortages of the 
type described in subsection (a). 

"(c) Other Programs. — The Secretary may provide for the ex- 
pansion of other applied epidemiology training programs that meet 
objectives similar to the objectives of the programs described in 
subsection (b). 

"(d) Work Obligation. — Participation in fellowship training 
programs under this section shall be deemed to be service for pur- 
poses of satisfying work obligations stipulated in contracts under 
section 338I(j). 

"(e) General Support. — Amounts may be used from grants 
awarded under this section to expand the Public Health 
Informatics Fellowship Program at the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention to better support all public health systems at all 
levels of government. 

"(f) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are authorized 
to be appropriated to carry out this section $39,500,000 for each of 
fiscal years 2010 through 2013, of which — 

"(1) $5,000,000 shall be made available in each such fiscal 

year for epidemiology fellowship training program activities 

under subsections (b) and (c); 

June 9, 2010 



567 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5315N271 PHSA 



"(2) $5,000,000 shall be made available in each such fiscal 
year for laboratory fellowship training programs under sub- 
section (b); 

"(3) $5,000,000 shall be made available in each such fiscal 
year for the Public Health Informatics Fellowship Program 
under subsection (e); and 

"(4) $24,500,000 shall be made available for expanding the 
Epidemic Intelligence Service under subsection (a).". 

SEC. 5315. UNITED STATES PUBLIC HEALTH SCIENCES TRACK. 

Title II of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 202 et seq.) 
is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"PART D— UNITED STATES PUBLIC HEALTH 
SCIENCES TRACK 

"SEC. 271 [42 U.S.C. 2391]. ESTABLISHMENT. 

"(a) United States Public Health Services Track. — 

"(1) In general. — There is hereby authorized to be estab- 
lished a United States Public Health Sciences Track (referred 
to in this part as the 'Track'), at sites to be selected by the Sec- 
retary, with authority to grant appropriate advanced degrees 
in a manner that uniquely emphasizes team-based service, 
public health, epidemiology, and emergency preparedness and 
response. It shall be so organized as to graduate not less 
than — 

"(A) 150 medical students annually, 10 of whom shall 
be awarded studentships to the Uniformed Services Uni- 
versity of Health Sciences; 

"(B) 100 dental students annually; 
"(C) 250 nursing students annually; 
"(D) 100 public health students annually; 
"(E) 100 behavioral and mental health professional 
students annually; 

"(F) 100 physician assistant or nurse practitioner stu- 
dents annually; and 

"(G) 50 pharmacy students annually. 
"(2) Locations. — The Track shall be located at existing 
and accredited, affiliated health professions education training 
programs at academic health centers located in regions of the 
United States determined appropriate by the Surgeon General, 
in consultation with the National Health Care Workforce Com- 
mission established in section 5101 of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act. 

"(b) Number of Graduates. — Except as provided in subsection 
(a), the number of persons to be graduated from the Track shall be 
prescribed by the Secretary. In so prescribing the number of per- 
sons to be graduated from the Track, the Secretary shall institute 
actions necessary to ensure the maximum number of first-year en- 
rollments in the Track consistent with the academic capacity of the 
affiliated sites and the needs of the United States for medical, den- 
tal, and nursing personnel. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5315X272 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



568 



"(c) Development. — The development of the Track may be by 
such phases as the Secretary may prescribe subject to the require- 
ments of subsection (a). 

"(d) Integrated Longitudinal Plan. — The Surgeon General 
shall develop an integrated longitudinal plan for health professions 
continuing education throughout the continuum of health-related 
education, training, and practice. Training under such plan shall 
emphasize patient-centered, interdisciplinary, and care coordina- 
tion skills. Experience with deployment of emergency response 
teams shall be included during the clinical experiences. 

"(e) Faculty Development. — The Surgeon General shall de- 
velop faculty development programs and curricula in decentralized 
venues of health care, to balance urban, tertiary, and inpatient 
venues. 

"SEC. 272 [42 U.S.C. 2391-1]. ADMINISTRATION. 

"(a) In General. — The business of the Track shall be con- 
ducted by the Surgeon General with funds appropriated for and 
provided by the Department of Health and Human Services. The 
National Health Care Workforce Commission shall assist the Sur- 
geon General in an advisory capacity. 
"(b) Faculty. — 

"(1) In general. — The Surgeon General, after considering 
the recommendations of the National Health Care Workforce 
Commission, shall obtain the services of such professors, in- 
structors, and administrative and other employees as may be 
necessary to operate the Track, but utilize when possible, ex- 
isting affiliated health professions training institutions. Mem- 
bers of the faculty and staff shall be employed under salary 
schedules and granted retirement and other related benefits 
prescribed by the Secretary so as to place the employees of the 
Track faculty on a comparable basis with the employees of 
fully accredited schools of the health professions within the 
United States. 

"(2) Titles. — The Surgeon General may confer academic 
titles, as appropriate, upon the members of the faculty. 

"(3) Nonapplication of provisions. — The limitations in 
section 5373 of title 5, United States Code, shall not apply to 
the authority of the Surgeon General under paragraph (1) to 
prescribe salary schedules and other related benefits. 
"(c) Agreements. — The Surgeon General may negotiate agree- 
ments with agencies of the Federal Government to utilize on a re- 
imbursable basis appropriate existing Federal medical resources lo- 
cated in the United States (or locations selected in accordance with 
section 271(a)(2)). Under such agreements the facilities concerned 
will retain their identities and basic missions. The Surgeon Gen- 
eral may negotiate affiliation agreements with accredited univer- 
sities and health professions training institutions in the United 
States. Such agreements may include provisions for payments for 
educational services provided students participating in Department 
of Health and Human Services educational programs. 

"(d) Programs. — The Surgeon General may establish the fol- 
lowing educational programs for Track students: 

June 9, 2010 



569 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5315X272 PHSA 



"(1) Postdoctoral, postgraduate, and technological pro- 
grams. 

"(2) A cooperative program for medical, dental, physician 
assistant, pharmacy, behavioral and mental health, public 
health, and nursing students. 

"(3) Other programs that the Surgeon General determines 
necessary in order to operate the Track in a cost-effective man- 
ner. 

"(e) Continuing Medical Education. — The Surgeon General 
shall establish programs in continuing medical education for mem- 
bers of the health professions to the end that high standards of 
health care may be maintained within the United States. 
"(f) Authority of the Surgeon General. — 

"(1) In general. — The Surgeon General is authorized — 

"(A) to enter into contracts with, accept grants from, 
and make grants to any nonprofit entity for the purpose of 
carrying out cooperative enterprises in medical, dental, 
physician assistant, pharmacy, behavioral and mental 
health, public health, and nursing research, consultation, 
and education; 

"(B) to enter into contracts with entities under which 
the Surgeon General may furnish the services of such pro- 
fessional, technical, or clerical personnel as may be nec- 
essary to fulfill cooperative enterprises undertaken by the 
Track; 

"(C) to accept, hold, administer, invest, and spend any 
gift, devise, or bequest of personal property made to the 
Track, including any gift, devise, or bequest for the sup- 
port of an academic chair, teaching, research, or dem- 
onstration project; 

"(D) to enter into agreements with entities that may 
be utilized by the Track for the purpose of enhancing the 
activities of the Track in education, research, and techno- 
logical applications of knowledge; and 

"(E) to accept the voluntary services of guest scholars 
and other persons. 

"(2) Limitation. — The Surgeon General may not enter into 
any contract with an entity if the contract would obligate the 
Track to make outlays in advance of the enactment of budget 
authority for such outlays. 

"(3) Scientists. — Scientists or other medical, dental, or 
nursing personnel utilized by the Track under an agreement 
described in paragraph (1) may be appointed to any position 
within the Track and may be permitted to perform such duties 
within the Track as the Surgeon General may approve. 

"(4) Volunteer services. — A person who provides vol- 
untary services under the authority of subparagraph (E) of 
paragraph (1) shall be considered to be an employee of the Fed- 
eral Government for the purposes of chapter 81 of title 5, relat- 
ing to compensation for work-related injuries, and to be an em- 
ployee of the Federal Government for the purposes of chapter 
171 of title 28, relating to tort claims. Such a person who is 
not otherwise employed by the Federal Government shall not 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5315X273 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



570 



be considered to be a Federal employee for any other purpose 
by reason of the provision of such services. 

"SEC. 273 [42 U.S.C. 2391-2]. STUDENTS; SELECTION; OBLIGATION. 

"(a) Student Selection. — 

"(1) In general. — Medical, dental, physician assistant, 
pharmacy, behavioral and mental health, public health, and 
nursing students at the Track shall be selected under proce- 
dures prescribed by the Surgeon General. In so prescribing, the 
Surgeon General shall consider the recommendations of the 
National Health Care Workforce Commission. 

"(2) Priority. — In developing admissions procedures under 
paragraph (1), the Surgeon General shall ensure that such pro- 
cedures give priority to applicant medical, dental, physician as- 
sistant, pharmacy, behavioral and mental health, public 
health, and nursing students from rural communities and 
underrepresented minorities. 
"(b) Contract and Service Obligation. — 

"(1) Contract. — Upon being admitted to the Track, a med- 
ical, dental, physician assistant, pharmacy, behavioral and 
mental health, public health, or nursing student shall enter 
into a written contract with the Surgeon General that shall 
contain — 

"(A) an agreement under which — 

"(i) subject to subparagraph (B), the Surgeon Gen- 
eral agrees to provide the student with tuition (or tui- 
tion remission) and a student stipend (described in 
paragraph (2)) in each school year for a period of years 
(not to exceed 4 school years) determined by the stu- 
dent, during which period the student is enrolled in 
the Track at an affiliated or other participating health 
professions institution pursuant to an agreement be- 
tween the Track and such institution; and 

"(ii) subject to subparagraph (B), the student 
agrees — 

"(I) to accept the provision of such tuition and 
student stipend to the student; 

"(II) to maintain enrollment at the Track until 
the student completes the course of study in- 
volved; 

"(III) while enrolled in such course of study, to 
maintain an acceptable level of academic standing 
(as determined by the Surgeon General); 

"(IV) if pursuing a degree from a school of 
medicine or osteopathic medicine, dental, public 
health, or nursing school or a physician assistant, 
pharmacy, or behavioral and mental health pro- 
fessional program, to complete a residency or in- 
ternship in a specialty that the Surgeon General 
determines is appropriate; and 

"(V) to serve for a period of time (referred to 
in this part as the 'period of obligated service') 
within the Commissioned Corps of the Public 
Health Service equal to 2 years for each school 

June 9, 2010 



571 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5315X273 PHSA 



year during which such individual was enrolled at 
the College, reduced as provided for in paragraph 

(3); 

"(B) a provision that any financial obligation of the 
United States arising out of a contract entered into under 
this part and any obligation of the student which is condi- 
tioned thereon, is contingent upon funds being appro- 
priated to carry out this part; 

"(C) a statement of the damages to which the United 
States is entitled for the student's breach of the contract; 
and 

"(D) such other statements of the rights and liabilities 
of the Secretary and of the individual, not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this part. 
"(2) Tuition and student stipend. — 

"(A) Tuition remission rates. — The Surgeon General, 
based on the recommendations of the National Health 
Care Workforce Commission, shall establish Federal tui- 
tion remission rates to be used by the Track to provide re- 
imbursement to affiliated and other participating health 
professions institutions for the cost of educational services 
provided by such institutions to Track students. The agree- 
ment entered into by such participating institutions under 
paragraph (l)(A)(i) shall contain an agreement to accept as 
payment in full the established remission rate under this 
subparagraph. 

"(B) Stipend. — The Surgeon General, based on the 
recommendations of the National Health Care Workforce 
Commission, shall establish and update Federal stipend 
rates for payment to students under this part. 
"(3) Reductions in the period of obligated service. — 
The period of obligated service under paragraph (l)(A)(ii)(V) 
shall be reduced — 

"(A) in the case of a student who elects to participate 
in a high-needs speciality residency (as determined by the 
National Health Care Workforce Commission), by 3 
months for each year of such participation (not to exceed 
a total of 12 months); and 

"(B) in the case of a student who, upon completion of 
their residency, elects to practice in a Federal medical fa- 
cility (as defined in section 781(e)) that is located in a 
health professional shortage area (as defined in section 
332), by 3 months for year of full-time practice in such a 
facility (not to exceed a total of 12 months). 
"(c) Second 2 Years of Service. — During the third and fourth 
years in which a medical, dental, physician assistant, pharmacy, 
behavioral and mental health, public health, or nursing student is 
enrolled in the Track, training should be designed to prioritize clin- 
ical rotations in Federal medical facilities in health professional 
shortage areas, and emphasize a balance of hospital and commu- 
nity-based experiences, and training within interdisciplinary 
teams. 

"(d) Dentist, Physician Assistant, Pharmacist, Behavioral 
and Mental Health Professional, Public Health Profes- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5315X274 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



572 



sional, and Nurse Training. — The Surgeon General shall estab- 
lish provisions applicable with respect to dental, physician assist- 
ant, pharmacy, behavioral and mental health, public health, and 
nursing students that are comparable to those for medical students 
under this section, including service obligations, tuition support, 
and stipend support. The Surgeon General shall give priority to 
health professions training institutions that train medical, dental, 
physician assistant, pharmacy, behavioral and mental health, pub- 
lic health, and nursing students for some significant period of time 
together, but at a minimum have a discrete and shared core cur- 
riculum. 

"(e) Elite Federal Disaster Teams. — The Surgeon General, 
in consultation with the Secretary, the Director of the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, and other appropriate military 
and Federal government agencies, shall develop criteria for the ap- 
pointment of highly qualified Track faculty, medical, dental, physi- 
cian assistant, pharmacy, behavioral and mental health, public 
health, and nursing students, and graduates to elite Federal dis- 
aster preparedness teams to train and to respond to public health 
emergencies, natural disasters, bioterrorism events, and other 
emergencies. 

"(f) Student Dropped From Track in Affiliate School. — A 
medical, dental, physician assistant, pharmacy, behavioral and 
mental health, public health, or nursing student who, under regu- 
lations prescribed by the Surgeon General, is dropped from the 
Track in an affiliated school for deficiency in conduct or studies, or 
for other reasons, shall be liable to the United States for all tuition 
and stipend support provided to the student. 

"SEC. 274 [42 U.S.C. 2391-3]. FUNDING. 

"Beginning with fiscal year 2010, the Secretary shall transfer 
from the Public Health and Social Services Emergency Fund such 
sums as may be necessary to carry out this part.". 

SEC. 5316 [42 U.S.C. 296j-l]. DEMONSTRATION GRANTS FOR FAMILY 
NURSE PRACTITIONER TRAINING PROGRAMS. 

[Section added by section 10501(e)] 

(a) Establishment of Program. — The Secretary of Health 
and Human Services (referred to in this section as the "Secretary") 
shall establish a training demonstration program for family nurse 
practitioners (referred to in this section as the "program") to em- 
ploy and provide 1-year training for nurse practitioners who have 
graduated from a nurse practitioner program for careers as pri- 
mary care providers in Federally qualified health centers (referred 
to in this section as "FQHCs") and nurse-managed health clinics 
(referred to in this section as "NMHCs"). 

(b) Purpose. — The purpose of the program is to enable each 
grant recipient to — 

(1) provide new nurse practitioners with clinical training 
to enable them to serve as primary care providers in FQHCs 
and NMHCs; 

(2) train new nurse practitioners to work under a model of 
primary care that is consistent with the principles set forth by 
the Institute of Medicine and the needs of vulnerable popu- 
lations; and 

June 9, 2010 



573 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5316 



(3) create a model of FQHC and NMHC training for nurse 
practitioners that may be replicated nationwide. 

(c) Grants. — The Secretary shall award 3-year grants to eligi- 
ble entities that meet the requirements established by the Sec- 
retary, for the purpose of operating the nurse practitioner primary 
care programs described in subsection (a) in such entities. 

(d) Eligible Entities. — To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section, an entity shall — 

(1) (A) be a FQHC as defined in section 1861(aa) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(aa)); or 

(B) be a nurse-managed health clinic, as defined in section 
330A-1 of the Public Health Service Act (as added by section 
5208 of this Act); and 

(2) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in 
such manner, and containing such information as the Sec- 
retary may require. 

(e) Priority in Awarding Grants. — In awarding grants under 
this section, the Secretary shall give priority to eligible entities 
that— 

(1) demonstrate sufficient infrastructure in size, scope, and 
capacity to undertake the requisite training of a minimum of 
3 nurse practitioners per year, and to provide to each awardee 
12 full months of full-time, paid employment and benefits con- 
sistent with the benefits offered to other full-time employees of 
such entity; 

(2) will assign not less than 1 staff nurse practitioner or 
physician to each of 4 precepted clinics; 

(3) will provide to each awardee specialty rotations, includ- 
ing specialty training in prenatal care and women's health, 
adult and child psychiatry, orthopedics, geriatrics, and at least 
3 other high-volume, high-burden specialty areas; 

(4) provide sessions on high-volume, high-risk health prob- 
lems and have a record of training health care professionals in 
the care of children, older adults, and underserved populations; 
and 

(5) collaborate with other safety net providers, schools, col- 
leges, and universities that provide health professions training. 

(f) Eligibility of Nurse Practitioners. — 

(1) In general. — To be eligible for acceptance to a pro- 
gram funded through a grant awarded under this section, an 
individual shall — 

(A) be licensed or eligible for licensure in the State in 
which the program is located as an advanced practice reg- 
istered nurse or advanced practice nurse and be eligible or 
board-certified as a family nurse practitioner; and 

(B) demonstrate commitment to a career as a primary 
care provider in a FQHC or in a NMHC. 

(2) Preference. — In selecting awardees under the pro- 
gram, each grant recipient shall give preference to bilingual 
candidates that meet the requirements described in paragraph 
(1). 

(3) Deferral of certain service. — The starting date of 
required service of individuals in the National Health Service 
Corps Service program under title II of the Public Health Serv- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5401 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



574 



ice Act (42 U.S.C. 202 et seq.) who receive training under this 
section shall be deferred until the date that is 22 days after 
the date of completion of the program. 

(g) Grant Amount. — Each grant awarded under this section 
shall be in an amount not to exceed $600,000 per year. A grant re- 
cipient may carry over funds from 1 fiscal year to another without 
obtaining approval from the Secretary. 

(h) Technical Assistance Grants. — The Secretary may 
award technical assistance grants to 1 or more FQHCs or NMHCs 
that have demonstrated expertise in establishing a nurse practi- 
tioner residency training program. Such technical assistance grants 
shall be for the purpose of providing technical assistance to other 
recipients of grants under subsection (c). 

(i) Authorization of Appropriations. — To carry out this sec- 
tion, there is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be 
necessary for each of fiscal years 2011 through 2014. 

Subtitle E — Supporting the Existing Health 
Care Workforce 

SEC. 5401. CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE. 

Section 736 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 293) 
is amended by striking subsection (h) and inserting the following: 
"(h) Formula for Allocations. — 

"(1) Allocations. — Based on the amount appropriated 
under subsection (i) for a fiscal year, the following subpara- 
graphs shall apply as appropriate: 

"(A) In general. — If the amounts appropriated under 
subsection (i) for a fiscal year are $24,000,000 or less — 

"(i) the Secretary shall make available 
$12,000,000 for grants under subsection (a) to health 
professions schools that meet the conditions described 
in subsection (c)(2)(A); and 

"(ii) and available after grants are made with 
funds under clause (i), the Secretary shall make avail- 
able — 

"(I) 60 percent of such amount for grants 
under subsection (a) to health professions schools 
that meet the conditions described in paragraph 
(3) or (4) of subsection (c) (including meeting the 
conditions under subsection (e)); and 

"(II) 40 percent of such amount for grants 
under subsection (a) to health professions schools 
that meet the conditions described in subsection 
(0(5). 

"(B) Funding in excess of $24,000,000. — If amounts ap- 
propriated under subsection (i) for a fiscal year exceed 
$24,000,000 but are less than $30,000,000— 

"(i) 80 percent of such excess amounts shall be 
made available for grants under subsection (a) to 
health professions schools that meet the requirements 
described in paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection (c) (in- 

June 9, 2010 



575 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5401 



eluding meeting conditions pursuant to subsection (e)); 
and 

"(ii) 20 percent of such excess amount shall be 
made available for grants under subsection (a) to 
health professions schools that meet the conditions de- 
scribed in subsection (c)(5). 

"(C) Funding in excess of $30,000,000. — If amounts ap- 
propriated under subsection (i) for a fiscal year exceed 
$30,000,000 but are less than $40,000,000, the Secretary 
shall make available — 

"(i) not less than $12,000,000 for grants under 
subsection (a) to health professions schools that meet 
the conditions described in subsection (c)(2)(A); 

"(ii) not less than $12,000,000 for grants under 
subsection (a) to health professions schools that meet 
the conditions described in paragraph (3) or (4) of sub- 
section (c) (including meeting conditions pursuant to 
subsection (e)); 

"(hi) not less than $6,000,000 for grants under 
subsection (a) to health professions schools that meet 
the conditions described in subsection (c)(5); and 

"(iv) after grants are made with funds under 
clauses (i) through (iii), any remaining excess amount 
for grants under subsection (a) to health professions 
schools that meet the conditions described in para- 
graph (2)(A), (3), (4), or (5) of subsection (c). 
"(D) Funding in excess of $40,000,000. — If amounts 
appropriated under subsection (i) for a fiscal year are 
$40,000,000 or more, the Secretary shall make available — 
"(i) not less than $16,000,000 for grants under 
subsection (a) to health professions schools that meet 
the conditions described in subsection (c)(2)(A); 

"(ii) not less than $16,000,000 for grants under 
subsection (a) to health professions schools that meet 
the conditions described in paragraph (3) or (4) of sub- 
section (c) (including meeting conditions pursuant to 
subsection (e)); 

"(iii) not less than $8,000,000 for grants under 
subsection (a) to health professions schools that meet 
the conditions described in subsection (c)(5); and 

"(iv) after grants are made with funds under 
clauses (i) through (iii), any remaining funds for 
grants under subsection (a) to health professions 
schools that meet the conditions described in para- 
graph (2)(A), (3), (4), or (5) of subsection (c). 
"(2) No limitation. — Nothing in this subsection shall be 
construed as limiting the centers of excellence referred to in 
this section to the designated amount, or to preclude such enti- 
ties from competing for grants under this section. 
"(3) Maintenance of effort. — 

"(A) In general. — With respect to activities for which 
a grant made under this part are authorized to be ex- 
pended, the Secretary may not make such a grant to a cen- 
ter of excellence for any fiscal year unless the center 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5402 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



576 



agrees to maintain expenditures of non-Federal amounts 
for such activities at a level that is not less than the level 
of such expenditures maintained by the center for the fis- 
cal year preceding the fiscal year for which the school re- 
ceives such a grant. 

"(B) Use of federal funds. — With respect to any 
Federal amounts received by a center of excellence and 
available for carrying out activities for which a grant 
under this part is authorized to be expended, the center 
shall, before expending the grant, expend the Federal 
amounts obtained from sources other than the grant, un- 
less given prior approval from the Secretary. 

"(i) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are authorized 
to be appropriated to carry out this section — 

"(1) $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2010 through 

2015; and 

"(2) and such sums as are necessary for each subsequent 
fiscal year.". 

SEC. 5402. HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS TRAINING FOR DIVERSITY. 

(a) Loan Repayments and Fellowships Regarding Faculty 
Positions.— Section 738(a)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 293b(a)(l)) is amended by striking "$20,000 of the principal 
and interest of the educational loans of such individuals." and in- 
serting "$30,000 of the principal and interest of the educational 
loans of such individuals.". 

(b) Scholarships for Disadvantaged Students. — Section 
740(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 293d(a)) is amended by striking 
"$37,000,000" and all that follows through "2002" and inserting 
"$51,000,000 for fiscal year 2010, and such sums as may be nec- 
essary for each of the fiscal years 2011 through 2014". 

(c) Reauthorization for Loan Repayments and Fellow- 
ships Regarding Faculty Positions. — Section 740(b) of such Act 
(42 U.S.C. 293d(b)) is amended by striking "appropriated" and all 
that follows through the period at the end and inserting "appro- 
priated, $5,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2010 through 2014.". 

(d) Reauthorization for Educational Assistance in the 
Health Professions Regarding Individuals From a Disadvan- 
taged Background— Section 740(c) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
293d(c)) is amended by striking the first sentence and inserting the 
following: "For the purpose of grants and contracts under section 
739(a)(1), there is authorized to be appropriated $60,000,000 for fis- 
cal year 2010 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 
fiscal years 2011 through 2014." 

SEC. 5403. INTERDISCIPLINARY, COMMUNITY-BASED LINKAGES. 

(a) Area Health Education Centers. — Section 751 of the 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 294a) is amended to read as 
follows: 

"SEC. 751 [42 U.S.C. 294a]. AREA HEALTH EDUCATION CENTERS. 

"(a) Establishment of Awards. — The Secretary shall make 
the following 2 types of awards in accordance with this section: 

"(1) Infrastructure development award. — The Sec- 
retary shall make awards to eligible entities to enable such en- 
tities to initiate health care workforce educational programs or 

June 9, 2010 



577 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5403X751 PHSA 



to continue to carry out comparable programs that are oper- 
ating at the time the award is made by planning, developing, 
operating, and evaluating an area health education center pro- 
gram. 

"(2) Point of service maintenance and enhancement 
award. — The Secretary shall make awards to eligible entities 
to maintain and improve the effectiveness and capabilities of 
an existing area health education center program, and make 
other modifications to the program that are appropriate due to 
changes in demographics, needs of the populations served, or 
other similar issues affecting the area health education center 
program. For the purposes of this section, the term 'Program' 
refers to the area health education center program. 
"(b) Eligible Entities; Application. — 
"(1) Eligible entities. — 

"(A) Infrastructure development. — For purposes of 
subsection (a)(1), the term 'eligible entity' means a school 
of medicine or osteopathic medicine, an incorporated con- 
sortium of such schools, or the parent institutions of such 
a school. With respect to a State in which no area health 
education center program is in operation, the Secretary 
may award a grant or contract under subsection (a)(1) to 
a school of nursing. 

"(B) Point of service maintenance and enhance- 
ment. — For purposes of subsection (a)(2), the term 'eligible 
entity' means an entity that has received funds under this 
section, is operating an area health education center pro- 
gram, including an area health education center or cen- 
ters, and has a center or centers that are no longer eligible 
to receive financial assistance under subsection (a)(1). 
"(2) Application. — An eligible entity desiring to receive an 
award under this section shall submit to the Secretary an ap- 
plication at such time, in such manner, and containing such in- 
formation as the Secretary may require. 
"(c) Use of Funds. — 

"(1) Required activities. — An eligible entity shall use 
amounts awarded under a grant under subsection (a)(1) or 
(a)(2) to carry out the following activities: 

"(A) Develop and implement strategies, in coordination 
with the applicable one-stop delivery system under section 
134(c) of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, to recruit 
individuals from underrepresented minority populations or 
from disadvantaged or rural backgrounds into health pro- 
fessions, and support such individuals in attaining such 
careers. 

"(B) Develop and implement strategies to foster and 
provide community-based training and education to indi- 
viduals seeking careers in health professions within under- 
served areas for the purpose of developing and maintain- 
ing a diverse health care workforce that is prepared to de- 
liver high-quality care, with an emphasis on primary care, 
in underserved areas or for health disparity populations, 
in collaboration with other Federal and State health care 
workforce development programs, the State workforce 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5403X751 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



578 



agency, and local workforce investment boards, and in 
health care safety net sites. 

"(C) Prepare individuals to more effectively provide 
health services to underserved areas and health disparity 
populations through field placements or preceptorships in 
conjunction with community-based organizations, accred- 
ited primary care residency training programs, Federally 
qualified health centers, rural health clinics, public health 
departments, or other appropriate facilities. 

"(D) Conduct and participate in interdisciplinary train- 
ing that involves physicians, physician assistants, nurse 
practitioners, nurse midwives, dentists, psychologists, 
pharmacists, optometrists, community health workers, 
public and allied health professionals, or other health pro- 
fessionals, as practicable. 

"(E) Deliver or facilitate continuing education and in- 
formation dissemination programs for health care profes- 
sionals, with an emphasis on individuals providing care in 
underserved areas and for health disparity populations. 

"(F) Propose and implement effective program and out- 
comes measurement and evaluation strategies. 

"(G) Establish a youth public health program to expose 
and recruit high school students into health careers, with 
a focus on careers in public health. 

"(2) Innovative opportunities. — An eligible entity may 
use amounts awarded under a grant under subsection (a)(1) or 
subsection (a)(2) to carry out any of the following activities: 

"(A) Develop and implement innovative curricula in 
collaboration with community-based accredited primary 
care residency training programs, Federally qualified 
health centers, rural health clinics, behavioral and mental 
health facilities, public health departments, or other ap- 
propriate facilities, with the goal of increasing the number 
of primary care physicians and other primary care pro- 
viders prepared to serve in underserved areas and health 
disparity populations. 

"(B) Coordinate community-based participatory re- 
search with academic health centers, and facilitate rapid 
flow and dissemination of evidence-based health care infor- 
mation, research results, and best practices to improve 
quality, efficiency, and effectiveness of health care and 
health care systems within community settings. 

"(C) Develop and implement other strategies to ad- 
dress identified workforce needs and increase and enhance 
the health care workforce in the area served by the area 
health education center program. 
"(d) Requirements. — 

"(1) Area health education center program. — In car- 
rying out this section, the Secretary shall ensure the following: 
"(A) An entity that receives an award under this sec- 
tion shall conduct at least 10 percent of clinical education 
required for medical students in community settings that 
are removed from the primary teaching facility of the con- 
tracting institution for grantees that operate a school of 

June 9, 2010 



579 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5403X751 PHSA 



medicine or osteopathic medicine. In States in which an 
entity that receives an award under this section is a nurs- 
ing school or its parent institution, the Secretary shall al- 
ternatively ensure that — 

"(i) the nursing school conducts at least 10 percent 
of clinical education required for nursing students in 
community settings that are remote from the primary 
teaching facility of the school; and 

"(ii) the entity receiving the award maintains a 
written agreement with a school of medicine or osteo- 
pathic medicine to place students from that school in 
training sites in the area health education center pro- 
gram area. 

"(B) An entity receiving funds under subsection (a)(2) 
does not distribute such funding to a center that is eligible 
to receive funding under subsection (a)(1). 
"(2) Area health education center. — The Secretary 
shall ensure that each area health education center program 
includes at least 1 area health education center, and that each 
such center — 

"(A) is a public or private organization whose struc- 
ture, governance, and operation is independent from the 
awardee and the parent institution of the awardee; 

"(B) is not a school of medicine or osteopathic medi- 
cine, the parent institution of such a school, or a branch 
campus or other subunit of a school of medicine or osteo- 
pathic medicine or its parent institution, or a consortium 
of such entities; 

"(C) designates an underserved area or population to 
be served by the center which is in a location removed 
from the main location of the teaching facilities of the 
schools participating in the program with such center and 
does not duplicate, in whole or in part, the geographic area 
or population served by any other center; 

"(D) fosters networking and collaboration among com- 
munities and between academic health centers and com- 
munity-based centers; 

"(E) serves communities with a demonstrated need of 
health professionals in partnership with academic medical 
centers; 

"(F) addresses the health care workforce needs of the 
communities served in coordination with the public work- 
force investment system; and 

"(G) has a community-based governing or advisory 
board that reflects the diversity of the communities in- 
volved. 

"(e) Matching Funds. — With respect to the costs of operating 
a program through a grant under this section, to be eligible for fi- 
nancial assistance under this section, an entity shall make avail- 
able (directly or through contributions from State, county or munic- 
ipal governments, or the private sector) recurring non-Federal con- 
tributions in cash or in kind, toward such costs in an amount that 
is equal to not less than 50 percent of such costs. At least 25 per- 
cent of the total required non-Federal contributions shall be in 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5403X751 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



580 



cash. An entity may apply to the Secretary for a waiver of not more 
than 75 percent of the matching fund amount required by the enti- 
ty for each of the first 3 years the entity is funded through a grant 
under subsection (a)(1). 

"(f) Limitation. — Not less than 75 percent of the total amount 
provided to an area health education center program under sub- 
section (a)(1) or (a)(2) shall be allocated to the area health edu- 
cation centers participating in the program under this section. To 
provide needed flexibility to newly funded area health education 
center programs, the Secretary may waive the requirement in the 
sentence for the first 2 years of a new area health education center 
program funded under subsection (a)(1). 

"(g) Award. — An award to an entity under this section shall be 
not less than $250,000 annually per area health education center 
included in the program involved. If amounts appropriated to carry 
out this section are not sufficient to comply with the preceding sen- 
tence, the Secretary may reduce the per center amount provided for 
in such sentence as necessary, provided the distribution established 
in subsection (j)(2) is maintained. 
"(h) Project Terms. — 

"(1) In general. — Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
period during which payments may be made under an award 
under subsection (a)(1) may not exceed — 

"(A) in the case of a program, 12 years; or 
"(B) in the case of a center within a program, 6 years. 
"(2) Exception. — The periods described in paragraph (1) 
shall not apply to programs receiving point of service mainte- 
nance and enhancement awards under subsection (a)(2) to 
maintain existing centers and activities. 

"(i) Inapplicability of Provision. — Notwithstanding any 
other provision of this title, section 791(a) shall not apply to an 
area health education center funded under this section, 
"(j) Authorization of Appropriations. — 

"(1) In general. — There is authorized to be appropriated 
to carry out this section $125,000,000 for each of the fiscal 
years 2010 through 2014. 

"(2) Requirements. — Of the amounts appropriated for a 
fiscal year under paragraph (1) — 

"(A) not more than 35 percent shall be used for awards 
under subsection (a)(1); 

"(B) not less than 60 percent shall be used for awards 
under subsection (a)(2); 

"(C) not more than 1 percent shall be used for grants 
and contracts to implement outcomes evaluation for the 
area health education centers; and 

"(D) not more than 4 percent shall be used for grants 
and contracts to provide technical assistance to entities re- 
ceiving awards under this section. 

"(3) Carryover funds. — An entity that receives an award 
under this section may carry over funds from 1 fiscal year to 
another without obtaining approval from the Secretary. In no 
case may any funds be carried over pursuant to the preceding 
sentence for more than 3 years. 

June 9, 2010 



581 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5404 



"(k) Sense of Congress. — It is the sense of the Congress that 
every State have an area health education center program in effect 
under this section.". 

(b) Continuing Educational Support for Health Profes- 
sionals Serving in Underserved Communities. — Part D of title 
VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 294 et seq.) is 
amended by striking section 752 and inserting the following: 

"SEC. 752 [42 U.S.C. 294b]. CONTINUING EDUCATIONAL SUPPORT FOR 
HEALTH PROFESSIONALS SERVING IN UNDERSERVED 
COMMUNITIES. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary shall make grants to, and 
enter into contracts with, eligible entities to improve health care, 
increase retention, increase representation of minority faculty 
members, enhance the practice environment, and provide informa- 
tion dissemination and educational support to reduce professional 
isolation through the timely dissemination of research findings 
using relevant resources. 

"(b) Eligible Entities. — For purposes of this section, the term 
'eligible entity' means an entity described in section 799(b). 

"(c) Application. — An eligible entity desiring to receive an 
award under this section shall submit to the Secretary an applica- 
tion at such time, in such manner, and containing such information 
as the Secretary may require. 

"(d) Use of Funds. — An eligible entity shall use amounts 
awarded under a grant or contract under this section to provide in- 
novative supportive activities to enhance education through dis- 
tance learning, continuing educational activities, collaborative con- 
ferences, and electronic and telelearning activities, with priority for 
primary care. 

"(e) Authorization. — There is authorized to be appropriated to 
carry out this section $5,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2010 
through 2014, and such sums as may be necessary for each subse- 
quent fiscal year.". 

SEC. 5404. WORKFORCE DD7ERSITY GRANTS. 

Section 821 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 296m) 
is amended — 

(1) in subsection (a) — 

(A) by striking "The Secretary may" and inserting the 
following: 

"(1) Authority. — The Secretary may"; 

(B) by striking "pre-entry preparation, and retention 
activities" and inserting the following: "stipends for di- 
ploma or associate degree nurses to enter a bridge or de- 
gree completion program, student scholarships or stipends 
for accelerated nursing degree programs, pre-entry prepa- 
ration, advanced education preparation, and retention ac- 
tivities"; and 

(2) in subsection (b) — 

(A) by striking "First" and all that follows through "in- 
cluding the" and inserting "National Advisory Council on 
Nurse Education and Practice and consult with nursing as- 
sociations including the National Coalition of Ethnic Mi- 
nority Nurse Associations,"; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5405 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



582 



(B) by inserting before the period the following: ", and 
other organizations determined appropriate by the Sec- 
retary". 

SEC. 5405. PRIMARY CARE EXTENSION PROGRAM. 

Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
280g et seq.), as amended by section 5313, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following: [As redesignated by section 
10501(m 

"SEC. 399V-1 [42 U.S.C. 280g-12]. PRIMARY CARE EXTENSION PRO- 
GRAM. 

"(a) Establishment, Purpose and Definition. — 

"(1) In GENERAL. — The Secretary, acting through the Direc- 
tor of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, shall 
establish a Primary Care Extension Program. 

"(2) Purpose. — The Primary Care Extension Program 
shall provide support and assistance to primary care providers 
to educate providers about preventive medicine, health pro- 
motion, chronic disease management, mental and behavioral 
health services (including substance abuse prevention and 
treatment services), and evidence-based and evidence-informed 
therapies and techniques, in order to enable providers to incor- 
porate such matters into their practice and to improve commu- 
nity health by working with community-based health connec- 
tors (referred to in this section as 'Health Extension Agents'). 
"(3) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(A) Health extension agent. — The term 'Health Ex- 
tension Agent' means any local, community-based health 
worker who facilitates and provides assistance to primary 
care practices by implementing quality improvement or 
system redesign, incorporating the principles of the pa- 
tient-centered medical home to provide high-quality, effec- 
tive, efficient, and safe primary care and to provide guid- 
ance to patients in culturally and linguistically appropriate 
ways, and linking practices to diverse health system re- 
sources. 

"(B) Primary care provider. — The term 'primary care 
provider' means a clinician who provides integrated, acces- 
sible health care services and who is accountable for ad- 
dressing a large majority of personal health care needs, in- 
cluding providing preventive and health promotion serv- 
ices for men, women, and children of all ages, developing 
a sustained partnership with patients, and practicing in 
the context of family and community, as recognized by a 
State licensing or regulatory authority, unless otherwise 
specified in this section. 
"(b) Grants To Establish State Hubs and Local Primary 
Care Extension Agencies. — 

"(1) Grants. — The Secretary shall award competitive 
grants to States for the establishment of State- or multistate- 
level primary care Primary Care Extension Program State 
Hubs (referred to in this section as 'Hubs'). 

"(2) Composition of hubs. — A Hub established by a State 
pursuant to paragraph (1) — 

June 9, 2010 



583 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5405V399V-1 PHSA 



"(A) [As revised by section 10501(f)(2)~\ shall consist of, 
at a minimum, the State health department, the entity re- 
sponsible for administering the State Medicaid program (if 
other than the State health department), the State-level 
entity administering the Medicare program, and the de- 
partments that train providers in primary care in 1 or 
more health professions schools in the State; and 

"(B) may include entities such as hospital associations, 
primary care practice-based research networks, health pro- 
fessional societies, State primary care associations, State 
licensing boards, organizations with a contract with the 
Secretary under section 1153 of the Social Security Act, 
consumer groups, and other appropriate entities. 
"(c) State and Local Activities. — 

"(1) Hub activities. — Hubs established under a grant 
under subsection (b) shall — 

"(A) submit to the Secretary a plan to coordinate func- 
tions with quality improvement organizations and area 
health education centers if such entities are members of 
the Hub not described in subsection (b)(2)(A); 

"(B) contract with a county- or local-level entity that 
shall serve as the Primary Care Extension Agency to ad- 
minister the services described in paragraph (2); 

"(C) organize and administer grant funds to county- or 
local-level Primary Care Extension Agencies that serve a 
catchment area, as determined by the State; and 

"(D) organize State-wide or multistat* networks of 
local-level Primary Care Extension Agencies to share and 
disseminate information and practices. 
"(2) Local primary care extension agency activities. — 
"(A) Required activities. — Primary Care Extension 
Agencies established by a Hub under paragraph (1) shall — 
"(i) assist primary care providers to implement a 
patient-centered medical home to improve the accessi- 
bility, quality, and efficiency of primary care services, 
including health homes; 

"(ii) develop and support primary care learning 
communities to enhance the dissemination of research 
findings for evidence-based practice, assess implemen- 
tation of practice improvement, share best practices, 
and involve community clinicians in the generation of 
new knowledge and identification of important ques- 
tions for research; 

"(hi) participate in a national network of Primary 
Care Extension Hubs and propose how the Primary 
Care Extension Agency will share and disseminate les- 
sons learned and best practices; and 

"(iv) develop a plan for financial sustainability in- 
volving State, local, and private contributions, to pro- 
vide for the reduction in Federal funds that is ex- 
pected after an initial 6-year period of program estab- 
lishment, infrastructure development, and planning. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5405\399V-1 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



584 



"(B) Discretionary activities. — Primary Care Exten- 
sion Agencies established by a Hub under paragraph (1) 
may— 

"(i) provide technical assistance, training, and or- 
ganizational support for community health teams es- 
tablished under section 3602 of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act; 

"(ii) collect data and provision of primary care pro- 
vider feedback from standardized measurements of 
processes and outcomes to aid in continuous perform- 
ance improvement; 

"(hi) collaborate with local health departments, 
community health centers, tribes and tribal entities, 
and other community agencies to identify community 
health priorities and local health workforce needs, and 
participate in community-based efforts to address the 
social and primary determinants of health, strengthen 
the local primary care workforce, and eliminate health 
disparities; 

"(iv) develop measures to monitor the impact of 
the proposed program on the health of practice enroll- 
ees and of the wider community served; and 

"(v) participate in other activities, as determined 
appropriate by the Secretary. 
"(d) Federal Program Administration. — 

"(1) Grants; types. — Grants awarded under subsection (b) 
shall be — 

"(A) program grants, that are awarded to State or 
multistate entities that submit fully-developed plans for 
the implementation of a Hub, for a period of 6 years; or 

"(B) planning grants, that are awarded to State or 
multistate entities with the goal of developing a plan for 
a Hub, for a period of 2 years. 

"(2) Applications. — To be eligible for a grant under sub- 
section (b), a State or multistate entity shall submit to the Sec- 
retary an application, at such time, in such manner, and con- 
taining such information as the Secretary may require. 

"(3) Evaluation. — A State that receives a grant under 
subsection (b) shall be evaluated at the end of the grant period 
by an evaluation panel appointed by the Secretary. 

"(4) Continuing support. — After the sixth year in which 
assistance is provided to a State under a grant awarded under 
subsection (b), the State may receive additional support under 
this section if the State program has received satisfactory eval- 
uations with respect to program performance and the merits of 
the State sustainability plan, as determined by the Secretary. 

"(5) Limitation. — A State shall not use in excess of 10 per- 
cent of the amount received under a grant to carry out admin- 
istrative activities under this section. Funds awarded pursuant 
to this section shall not be used for funding direct patient care. 
"(e) Requirements on the Secretary. — In carrying out this 
section, the Secretary shall consult with the heads of other Federal 
agencies with demonstrated experience and expertise in health care 
and preventive medicine, such as the Centers for Disease Control 

June 9, 2010 



585 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5501 



and Prevention, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Adminis- 
tration, the Health Resources and Services Administration, the Na- 
tional Institutes of Health, the Office of the National Coordinator 
for Health Information Technology, the Indian Health Service, the 
Agricultural Cooperative Extension Service of the Department of 
Agriculture, and other entities, as the Secretary determines appro- 
priate. 

"(f) Authorization of Appropriations. — To awards grants as 
provided in subsection (d), there are authorized to be appropriated 
$120,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2011 and 2012, and such sums 
as may be necessary to carry out this section for each of fiscal 
years 2013 through 2014.". 

Subtitle F — Strengthening Primary Care 
and Other Workforce Improvements 

SEC. 5501. EXPANDING ACCESS TO PRIMARY CARE SERVICES AND 
GENERAL SURGERY SERVICES. 

(a) Incentive Payment Program for Primary Care Serv- 
ices— 

(1) In general. — Section 1833 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 13951) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new subsection: 

"(x) Incentive Payments for Primary Care Services. — 

"(1) In general. — In the case of primary care services fur- 
nished on or after January 1, 2011, and before January 1, 
2016, by a primary care practitioner, in addition to the amount 
of payment that would otherwise be made for such services 
under this part, there also shall be paid (on a monthly or quar- 
terly basis) an amount equal to 10 percent of the payment 
amount for the service under this part. 
"(2) Definitions. — In this subsection: 

"(A) Primary care practitioner. — The term 'primary 
care practitioner' means an individual — 
"(i) who- 
'll) is a physician (as described in section 
1861(r)(l)) who has a primary specialty designa- 
tion of family medicine, internal medicine, geri- 
atric medicine, or pediatric medicine; or 

"(II) is a nurse practitioner, clinical nurse spe- 
cialist, or physician assistant (as those terms are 
defined in section 1861(aa)(5)); and 
"(ii) for whom primary care services accounted for 
at least 60 percent of the allowed charges under this 
part for such physician or practitioner in a prior pe- 
riod as determined appropriate by the Secretary. 
"(B) Primary care services. — The term 'primary care 
services' means services identified, as of January 1, 2009, 
by the following HCPCS codes (and as subsequently modi- 
fied by the Secretary): 

"(i) 99201 through 99215. 
"(ii) 99304 through 99340. 
"(hi) 99341 through 99350. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5501 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



586 



"(3) Coordination with other payments. — The amount 
of the additional payment for a service under this subsection 
and subsection (m) shall be determined without regard to any 
additional payment for the service under subsection (m) and 
this subsection, respectively. 

"(4) Limitation on review. — There shall be no adminis- 
trative or judicial review under section 1869, 1878, or other- 
wise, respecting the identification of primary care practitioners 
under this subsection.". 

(2) Conforming amendment. — Section 1834(g)(2)(B) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(g)(2)(B)) is amended by 
adding at the end the following sentence: "Section 1833(x) shall 
not be taken into account in determining the amounts that 
would otherwise be paid pursuant to the preceding sentence.", 
(b) Incentive Payment Program for Major Surgical Pro- 
cedures Furnished in Health Professional Shortage Areas. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1833 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 13951), as amended by subsection (a)(1), is amended 
by adding at the end the following new subsection: 

"(y) Incentive Payments for Major Surgical Procedures 
Furnished in Health Professional Shortage Areas. — 

"(1) In general. — In the case of major surgical procedures 
furnished on or after January 1, 2011, and before January 1, 
2016, by a general surgeon in an area that is designated 
(under section 332(a)(1)(A) of the Public Health Service Act) as 
a health professional shortage area as identified by the Sec- 
retary prior to the beginning of the year involved, in addition 
to the amount of payment that would otherwise be made for 
such services under this part, there also shall be paid (on a 
monthly or quarterly basis) an amount equal to 10 percent of 
the payment amount for the service under this part. 
"(2) Definitions. — In this subsection: 

"(A) General surgeon. — In this subsection, the term 
'general surgeon' means a physician (as described in sec- 
tion 1861(r)(l)) who has designated CMS specialty code 
02-General Surgery as their primary specialty code in the 
physician's enrollment under section 1866(j). 

"(B) Major surgical procedures. — The term 'major 
surgical procedures' means physicians' services which are 
surgical procedures for which a 10-day or 90-day global pe- 
riod is used for payment under the fee schedule under sec- 
tion 1848(b). 

"(3) Coordination with other payments. — The amount 
of the additional payment for a service under this subsection 
and subsection (m) shall be determined without regard to any 
additional payment for the service under subsection (m) and 
this subsection, respectively. 

"(4) Application. — The provisions of paragraph (2) and (4) 
of subsection (m) shall apply to the determination of additional 
payments under this subsection in the same manner as such 
provisions apply to the determination of additional payments 
under subsection (m).". 

(2) Conforming amendment. — Section 1834(g)(2)(B) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(g)(2)(B)), as amended by 

June 9, 2010 



587 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5503 



subsection (a)(2), is amended by striking "Section 1833(x)" and 
inserting "Subsections (x) and (y) of section 1833" in the last 
sentence. 

[Subsection (c) repealed by section 10501(h)] 

SEC. 5502. [MEDICARE FEDERALLY QUALIFIED HEALTH CENTER IM- 
PROVEMENTS] [REPEALED] . 

[Section repealed by section 10501(i)(l); subsequent sections not 
redesignated.] 

SEC. 5503. DISTRIBUTION OF ADDITIONAL RESIDENCY POSITIONS. 

(a) In General. — Section 1886(h) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395ww(h)) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (4)(F)(i), by striking "paragraph (7)" and 
inserting "paragraphs (7) and (8)"; 

(2) in paragraph (4)(H)(i), by striking "paragraph (7)" and 
inserting "paragraphs (7) and (8)"; 

(3) in paragraph (7)(E), by inserting "or paragraph (8)" be- 
fore the period at the end; and 

(4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 

"(8) Distribution of additional residency positions. — 
"(A) Reductions in limit based on unused posi- 
tions. — 

"(i) In general. — Except as provided in clause (ii), 
if a hospital's reference resident level (as denned in 
subparagraph (H)(i)) is less than the otherwise appli- 
cable resident limit (as defined in subparagraph 
(H)(iii)), effective for portions of cost reporting periods 
occurring on or after July 1, 2011, the otherwise appli- 
cable resident limit shall be reduced by 65 percent of 
the difference between such otherwise applicable resi- 
dent limit and such reference resident level. 

"(ii) Exceptions. — This subparagraph shall not 
apply to — 

"(I) a hospital located in a rural area (as de- 
fined in subsection (d)(2)(D)(ii)) with fewer than 
250 acute care inpatient beds; 

"(II) a hospital that was part of a qualifying 
entity which had a voluntary residency reduction 
plan approved under paragraph (6)(B) or under 
the authority of section 402 of Public Law 90-248, 
if the hospital demonstrates to the Secretary that 
it has a specified plan in place for filling the un- 
used positions by not later than 2 years after the 
date of enactment of this paragraph; or 

"(III) a hospital described in paragraph 
(4)(H)(v). 
"(B) Distribution. — 

"(i) In general. — The Secretary shall increase the 
otherwise applicable resident limit for each qualifying 
hospital that submits an application under this sub- 
paragraph by such number as the Secretary may ap- 
prove for portions of cost reporting periods occurring 
on or after July 1, 2011. The aggregate number of in- 
creases in the otherwise applicable resident limit 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5503 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



588 



under this subparagraph shall be equal to the aggre- 
gate reduction in such limits attributable to subpara- 
graph (A) (as estimated by the Secretary). 

"(ii) Requirements. — Subject to clause (iii), a hos- 
pital that receives an increase in the otherwise appli- 
cable resident limit under this subparagraph shall en- 
sure, during the 5-year period beginning on the date 
of such increase, that — 

"(I) the number of full-time equivalent pri- 
mary care residents, as defined in paragraph 
(5)(H) (as determined by the Secretary), excluding 
any additional positions under subclause (II), is 
not less than the average number of full-time 
equivalent primary care residents (as so deter- 
mined) during the 3 most recent cost reporting pe- 
riods ending prior to the date of enactment of this 
paragraph; and 

"(II) not less than 75 percent of the positions 
attributable to such increase are in a primary care 
or general surgery residency (as determined by 
the Secretary). 
The Secretary may determine whether a hospital has 
met the requirements under this clause during such 5- 
year period in such manner and at such time as the 
Secretary determines appropriate, including at the end 
of such 5-year period. 

"(iii) Redistribution of positions if hospital no 

LONGER MEETS CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS. — In the Case 

where the Secretary determines that a hospital de- 
scribed in clause (ii) does not meet either of the re- 
quirements under subclause (I) or (II) of such clause, 
the Secretary shall — 

"(I) reduce the otherwise applicable resident 
limit of the hospital by the amount by which such 
limit was increased under this paragraph; and 

"(II) provide for the distribution of positions 
attributable to such reduction in accordance with 
the requirements of this paragraph. 
"(C) Considerations in redistribution. — In deter- 
mining for which hospitals the increase in the otherwise 
applicable resident limit is provided under subparagraph 
(B), the Secretary shall take into account — 

"(i) the demonstration likelihood of the hospital 
filling the positions made available under this para- 
graph within the first 3 cost reporting periods begin- 
ning on or after July 1, 2011, as determined by the 
Secretary; and 

"(ii) whether the hospital has an accredited rural 
training track (as described in paragraph (4)(H)(iv)). 
"(D) Priority for certain areas. — In determining for 
which hospitals the increase in the otherwise applicable 
resident limit is provided under subparagraph (B), subject 
to subparagraph (E), the Secretary shall distribute the in- 
crease to hospitals based on the following factors: 

June 9, 2010 



589 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5503 



"(i) Whether the hospital is located in a State with 
a resident-to-population ratio in the lowest quartile (as 
determined by the Secretary). 

"(ii) Whether the hospital is located in a State, a 
territory of the United States, or the District of Co- 
lumbia that is among the top 10 States, territories, or 
Districts in terms of the ratio of — 

"(I) the total population of the State, territory, 
or District living in an area designated (under 
such section 332(a)(1)(A)) as a health professional 
shortage area (as of the date of enactment of this 
paragraph); to 

"(II) the total population of the State, terri- 
tory, or District (as determined by the Secretary 
based on the most recent available population 
data published by the Bureau of the Census), 
"(hi) Whether the hospital is located in a rural 
area (as defined in subsection (d)(2)(D)(ii)). 
"(E) Reservation of positions for certain hos- 
pitals. — 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), the Sec- 
retary shall reserve the positions available for dis- 
tribution under this paragraph as follows: 

"(I) 70 percent of such positions for distribu- 
tion to hospitals described in clause (i) of subpara- 
graph (D). 

"(II) 30 percent of such positions for distribu- 
tion to hospitals described in clause (ii) and (hi) of 
such subparagraph. 

"(ii) Exception if positions not redistributed 
by july i, 2011. — In the case where the Secretary does 
not distribute positions to hospitals in accordance with 
clause (i) by July 1, 2011, the Secretary shall dis- 
tribute such positions to other hospitals in accordance 
with the considerations described in subparagraph (C) 
and the priority described in subparagraph (D). 
"(F) Limitation. — A hospital may not receive more 
than 75 full-time equivalent additional residency positions 
under this paragraph. 

"(G) Application of per resident amounts for pri- 
mary care and nonprimary care. — With respect to addi- 
tional residency positions in a hospital attributable to the 
increase provided under this paragraph, the approved FTE 
per resident amounts are deemed to be equal to the hos- 
pital per resident amounts for primary care and nonpri- 
mary care computed under paragraph (2)(D) for that hos- 
pital. 

"(H) Definitions. — In this paragraph: 

"(i) Reference resident level. — The term 'ref- 
erence resident level' means, with respect to a hos- 
pital, the highest resident level for any of the 3 most 
recent cost reporting periods (ending before the date of 
the enactment of this paragraph) of the hospital for 
which a cost report has been settled (or, if not, sub- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5504 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



590 



mitted (subject to audit)), as determined by the Sec- 
retary. 

"(ii) Resident level. — The term 'resident level' 
has the meaning given such term in paragraph 

(7)(C)(i). 

"(hi) Otherwise applicable resident limit. — 
The term 'otherwise applicable resident limit' means, 
with respect to a hospital, the limit otherwise applica- 
ble under subparagraphs (F)(i) and (H) of paragraph 
(4) on the resident level for the hospital determined 
without regard to this paragraph but taking into ac- 
count paragraph (7)(A).". 

(b) IME. — 

(1) In general.— Section 1886(d)(5)(B)(v) of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(B)(v)), in the second sen- 
tence, is amended — 

(A) by striking "subsection (h)(7)" and inserting "sub- 
sections (h)(7) and (h)(8)"; and 

(B) by striking "it applies" and inserting "they apply". 

(2) Conforming amendment. — Section 1886(d)(5)(B) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(B)) is amended by 
adding at the end the following clause: 

"(x) For discharges occurring on or after July 1, 2011, inso- 
far as an additional payment amount under this subparagraph 
is attributable to resident positions distributed to a hospital 
under subsection (h)(8)(B), the indirect teaching adjustment 
factor shall be computed in the same manner as provided 
under clause (ii) with respect to such resident positions.". 

(c) Conforming Amendment. — Section 422(b)(2) of the Medi- 
care Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 
2003 (Public Law 108-173) is amended by striking "section 
1886(h)(7)" and all that follows and inserting "paragraphs (7) and 
(8) of subsection (h) of section 1886 of the Social Security Act". 

SEC. 5504. COUNTING RESIDENT TIME IN NONPROVIDER SETTINGS. 

(a) GME.— Section 1886(h)(4)(E) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395ww(h)(4)(E)) is amended— 

(1) by striking "shall be counted and that all the time" and 
inserting "shall be counted and that — 

"(i) effective for cost reporting periods beginning 
before July 1, 2010, all the time;"; 

(2) in clause (i), as inserted by paragraph (1), by striking 
the period at the end and inserting "; and"; 

(3) by inserting after clause (i), as so inserted, the fol- 
lowing new clause: 

"(ii) effective for cost reporting periods beginning 
on or after July 1, 2010, all the time so spent by a 
resident shall be counted towards the determination of 
full-time equivalency, without regard to the setting in 
which the activities are performed, if a hospital incurs 
the costs of the stipends and fringe benefits of the 
resident during the time the resident spends in that 
setting. If more than one hospital incurs these costs, 
either directly or through a third party, such hospitals 

June 9, 2010 



591 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5505 



shall count a proportional share of the time, as deter- 
mined by written agreement between the hospitals, 
that a resident spends training in that setting."; and 
(4) by adding at the end the following flush sentence: 
"Any hospital claiming under this subparagraph for time 
spent in a nonprovider setting shall maintain and make 
available to the Secretary records regarding the amount of 
such time and such amount in comparison with amounts 
of such time in such base year as the Secretary shall speci- 

fy-"- 

(b) IME.— Section 1886(d)(5)(B)(iv) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)) is amended— 

(1) by striking "(iv) Effective for discharges occurring on or 
after October 1, 1997" and inserting "(iv)(I) Effective for dis- 
charges occurring on or after October 1, 1997, and before July 
1, 2010"; and 

(2) by inserting after clause (I), as inserted by paragraph 
(1), the following new subparagraph: 

"(II) Effective for discharges occurring on or after July 1, 
2010, all the time spent by an intern or resident in patient 
care activities in a nonprovider setting shall be counted to- 
wards the determination of full-time equivalency if a hospital 
incurs the costs of the stipends and fringe benefits of the in- 
tern or resident during the time the intern or resident spends 
in that setting. If more than one hospital incurs these costs, ei- 
ther directly or through a third party, such hospitals shall 
count a proportional share of the time, as determined by writ- 
ten agreement between the hospitals, that a resident spends 
training in that setting.". 

(c) Application. — The amendments made by this section shall 
not be applied in a manner that requires reopening of any settled 
hospital cost reports as to which there is not a jurisdictionally 
proper appeal pending as of the date of the enactment of this Act 
on the issue of payment for indirect costs of medical education 
under section 1886(d)(5)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395ww(d)(5)(B)) or for direct graduate medical education costs 
under section 1886(h) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(h)). 

SEC. 5505. RULES FOR COUNTING RESIDENT TIME FOR DIDACTIC AND 
SCHOLARLY ACTIVITIES AND OTHER ACTIVITIES. 

(a) GME.— Section 1886(h) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395ww(h)), as amended by section 5504, is amended — 
(1) in paragraph (4) — 

(A) in subparagraph (E), by striking "Such rules" and 
inserting "Subject to subparagraphs (J) and (K), such 
rules"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new subpara- 
graphs: 

"(J) Treatment of certain nonprovider and didac- 
tic activities. — Such rules shall provide that all time 
spent by an intern or resident in an approved medical resi- 
dency training program in a nonprovider setting that is 
primarily engaged in furnishing patient care (as defined in 
paragraph (5)(K)) in non-patient care activities, such as di- 
dactic conferences and seminars, but not including re- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5505 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



592 



search not associated with the treatment or diagnosis of a 
particular patient, as such time and activities are denned 
by the Secretary, shall be counted toward the determina- 
tion of full-time equivalency. 

"(K) Treatment of certain other activities. — In 
determining the hospital's number of full-time equivalent 
residents for purposes of this subsection, all the time that 
is spent by an intern or resident in an approved medical 
residency training program on vacation, sick leave, or 
other approved leave, as such time is defined by the Sec- 
retary, and that does not prolong the total time the resi- 
dent is participating in the approved program beyond the 
normal duration of the program shall be counted toward 
the determination of full-time equivalency."; and 
(2) in paragraph (5), by adding at the end the following 
new subparagraph: 

"(K) Nonprovider setting that is primarily en- 
gaged in furnishing patient care. — The term 'nonpro- 
vider setting that is primarily engaged in furnishing pa- 
tient care' means a nonprovider setting in which the pri- 
mary activity is the care and treatment of patients, as de- 
fined by the Secretary.", 
(b) IME Determinations.— Section 1886(d)(5)(B) of such Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(B)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new clause: 

"(x)(I) The provisions of subparagraph (K) of sub- 
section (h)(4) shall apply under this subparagraph in 
the same manner as they apply under such subsection. 

"(II) In determining the hospital's number of full- 
time equivalent residents for purposes of this subpara- 
graph, all the time spent by an intern or resident in 
an approved medical residency training program in 
non-patient care activities, such as didactic con- 
ferences and seminars, as such time and activities are 
defined by the Secretary, that occurs in the hospital 
shall be counted toward the determination of full-time 
equivalency if the hospital — 

"(aa) is recognized as a subsection (d) hos- 
pital; 

"(bb) is recognized as a subsection (d) Puerto 
Rico hospital; 

"(cc) is reimbursed under a reimbursement 
system authorized under section 1814(b)(3); or 

"(dd) is a provider-based hospital outpatient 
department. 

"(Ill) In determining the hospital's number of full- 
time equivalent residents for purposes of this subpara- 
graph, all the time spent by an intern or resident in 
an approved medical residency training program in re- 
search activities that are not associated with the treat- 
ment or diagnosis of a particular patient, as such time 
and activities are defined by the Secretary, shall not 
be counted toward the determination of full-time 
equivalency.". 

June 9, 2010 



593 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5506 



(c) Effective Dates. — 

(1) In general. — Except as otherwise provided, the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services shall implement the 
amendments made by this section in a manner so as to apply 
to cost reporting periods beginning on or after January 1, 1983. 

(2) GME.— Section 1886(h)(4)(J) of the Social Security Act, 
as added by subsection (a)(1)(B), shall apply to cost reporting 
periods beginning on or after July 1, 2009. 

(3) IME.— Section 1886(d)(5)(B)(x)(III) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act, as added by subsection (b), shall apply to cost report- 
ing periods beginning on or after October 1, 2001. Such section, 
as so added, shall not give rise to any inference as to how the 
law in effect prior to such date should be interpreted. 

(d) Application. — The amendments made by this section shall 
not be applied in a manner that requires reopening of any settled 
cost reports as to which there is not a jurisdictionally proper appeal 
pending as of the date of the enactment of this Act on the issue 
of payment for indirect costs of medical education under section 
1886(d)(5)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(B)) 
or for direct graduate medical education costs under section 
1886(h) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(h)). [As added by section 
10501(j)l 

SEC. 5506. PRESERVATION OF RESIDENT CAP POSITIONS FROM 
CLOSED HOSPITALS. 

(a) GME.— Section 1886(h)(4)(H) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. Section 1395ww(h)(4)(H)) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new clause: 

"(vi) Redistribution of residency slots after a 

HOSPITAL CLOSES. — 

"(I) In general. — Subject to the succeeding 
provisions of this clause, the Secretary shall, by 
regulation, establish a process under which, in the 
case where a hospital (other than a hospital de- 
scribed in clause (v)) with an approved medical 
residency program closes on or after a date that is 
2 years before the date of enactment of this 
clause, the Secretary shall increase the otherwise 
applicable resident limit under this paragraph for 
other hospitals in accordance with this clause. 

"(II) Priority for hospitals in certain 
areas. — Subject to the succeeding provisions of 
this clause, in determining for which hospitals the 
increase in the otherwise applicable resident limit 
is provided under such process, the Secretary 
shall distribute the increase to hospitals in the fol- 
lowing priority order (with preference given with- 
in each category to hospitals that are members of 
the same affiliated group (as defined by the Sec- 
retary under clause (ii)) as the closed hospital): 

"(aa) First, to hospitals located in the 
same core-based statistical area as, or a core- 
based statistical area contiguous to, the hos- 
pital that closed. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5506 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



594 



"(bb) Second, to hospitals located in the 
same State as the hospital that closed. 

"(cc) Third, to hospitals located in the 
same region of the country as the hospital 
that closed. 

"(dd) Fourth, only if the Secretary is not 
able to distribute the increase to hospitals de- 
scribed in item (cc), to qualifying hospitals in 
accordance with the provisions of paragraph 
(8). 

"(HI) Requirement hospital likely to fill 
position within certain time period. — The Sec- 
retary may only increase the otherwise applicable 
resident limit of a hospital under such process if 
the Secretary determines the hospital has dem- 
onstrated a likelihood of filling the positions made 
available under this clause within 3 years. 

"(IV) Limitation. — The aggregate number of 
increases in the otherwise applicable resident lim- 
its for hospitals under this clause shall be equal 
to the number of resident positions in the ap- 
proved medical residency programs that closed on 
or after the date described in subclause (I). 

"(V) Administration. — Chapter 35 of title 44, 
United States Code, shall not apply to the imple- 
mentation of this clause.". 

(b) IME.— Section 1886(d)(5)(B)(v) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(B)(v)), in the second sentence, as amended 
by section 5503, is amended by striking "subsections (h)(7) and 
(h)(8)" and inserting "subsections (h)(4)(H)(vi), (h)(7), and (h)(8)". 

(c) Application. — The amendments made by this section shall 
not be applied in a manner that requires reopening of any settled 
hospital cost reports as to which there is not a jurisdictionally 
proper appeal pending as of the date of the enactment of this Act 
on the issue of payment for indirect costs of medical education 
under section 1886(d)(5)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395ww(d)(5)(B)) or for direct graduate medical education costs 
under section 1886(h) of such Act (42 U.S.C. Section 1395ww(h)). 

(d) Effect on Temporary FTE Cap Adjustments. — The Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services shall give consideration to 
the effect of the amendments made by this section on any tem- 
porary adjustment to a hospital's FTE cap under section 413.79(h) 
of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on the date of 
enactment of this Act) in order to ensure that there is no duplica- 
tion of FTE slots. Such amendments shall not affect the application 
of section 1886(h)(4)(H)(v) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395ww(h)(4)(H)(v)). 

(e) Conforming Amendment. — Section 1886(h)(7)(E) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(h)(7)(E)), as amended by sec- 
tion 5503(a), is amended by striking "paragraph or paragraph (8)" 
and inserting "this paragraph, paragraph (8), or paragraph 
(4)(H)(vi)". 

June 9, 2010 



595 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5507X2008 SSA 



SEC. 5507. DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS TO ADDRESS HEALTH PRO- 
FESSIONS WORKFORCE NEEDS; EXTENSION OF FAMILY- 
TO-FAMILY HEALTH INFORMATION CENTERS. 

(a) Authority To Conduct Demonstration Projects. — Title 
XX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397 et seq.) is amended 
by adding at the end the following: 

"SEC. 2008 [42 U.S.C. 1397g]. DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS TO ADDRESS 
HEALTH PROFESSIONS WORKFORCE NEEDS. 

"(a) Demonstration Projects To Provide Low-Income Indi- 
viduals With Opportunities for Education, Training, and Ca- 
reer Advancement To Address Health Professions Work- 
force Needs. — 

"(1) Authority to award grants. — The Secretary, in con- 
sultation with the Secretary of Labor, shall award grants to el- 
igible entities to conduct demonstration projects that are de- 
signed to provide eligible individuals with the opportunity to 
obtain education and training for occupations in the health 
care field that pay well and are expected to either experience 
labor shortages or be in high demand. 
"(2) Requirements. — 

"(A) Aid and supportive services. — 

"(i) In general. — A demonstration project con- 
ducted by an eligible entity awarded a grant under 
this section shall, if appropriate, provide eligible indi- 
viduals participating in the project with financial aid, 
child care, case management, and other supportive 
services. 

"(ii) Treatment. — Any aid, services, or incentives 
provided to an eligible beneficiary participating in a 
demonstration project under this section shall not be 
considered income, and shall not be taken into account 
for purposes of determining the individual's eligibility 
for, or amount of, benefits under any means-tested 
program. 

"(B) Consultation and coordination. — An eligible 
entity applying for a grant to carry out a demonstration 
project under this section shall demonstrate in the applica- 
tion that the entity has consulted with the State agency 
responsible for administering the State TANF program, 
the local workforce investment board in the area in which 
the project is to be conducted (unless the applicant is such 
board), the State workforce investment board established 
under section 111 of the Workforce Investment Act of 
1998, and the State Apprenticeship Agency recognized 
under the Act of August 16, 1937 (commonly known as the 
'National Apprenticeship Act') (or if no agency has been 
recognized in the State, the Office of Apprenticeship of the 
Department of Labor) and that the project will be carried 
out in coordination with such entities. 

"(C) Assurance of opportunities for Indian popu- 
lations. — The Secretary shall award at least 3 grants 
under this subsection to an eligible entity that is an Indian 
tribe, tribal organization, or Tribal College or University. 
"(3) Reports and evaluation. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5507\2008 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



596 



"(A) Eligible entities. — An eligible entity awarded a 
grant to conduct a demonstration project under this sub- 
section shall submit interim reports to the Secretary on 
the activities carried out under the project and a final re- 
port on such activities upon the conclusion of the entities' 
participation in the project. Such reports shall include as- 
sessments of the effectiveness of such activities with re- 
spect to improving outcomes for the eligible individuals 
participating in the project and with respect to addressing 
health professions workforce needs in the areas in which 
the project is conducted. 

"(B) Evaluation. — The Secretary shall, by grant, con- 
tract, or interagency agreement, evaluate the demonstra- 
tion projects conducted under this subsection. Such evalua- 
tion shall include identification of successful activities for 
creating opportunities for developing and sustaining, par- 
ticularly with respect to low-income individuals and other 
entry-level workers, a health professions workforce that 
has accessible entry points, that meets high standards for 
education, training, certification, and professional develop- 
ment, and that provides increased wages and affordable 
benefits, including health care coverage, that are respon- 
sive to the workforce's needs. 

"(C) Report to congress. — The Secretary shall sub- 
mit interim reports and, based on the evaluation con- 
ducted under subparagraph (B), a final report to Congress 
on the demonstration projects conducted under this sub- 
section. 

"(4) Definitions. — In this subsection: 

"(A) Eligible entity. — The term 'eligible entity' 
means a State, an Indian tribe or tribal organization, an 
institution of higher education, a local workforce invest- 
ment board established under section 117 of the Workforce 
Investment Act of 1998, a sponsor of an apprenticeship 
program registered under the National Apprenticeship Act 
or a community-based organization. 

"(B) Eligible individual. — 

"(i) In general. — The term 'eligible individual' 

means a individual receiving assistance under the 

State TANF program. 

"(ii) Other low-income individuals. — Such term 

may include other low-income individuals described by 

the eligible entity in its application for a grant under 

this section. 

"(C) Indian tribe; tribal organization. — The terms 
'Indian tribe' and 'tribal organization' have the meaning 
given such terms in section 4 of the Indian Self-Deter- 
mination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450b). 

"(D) Institution of higher education. — The term 
'institution of higher education' has the meaning given 
that term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001). 

"(E) State. — The term 'State' means each of the 50 
States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of 

June 9, 2010 



597 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5507X2008 SSA 



Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, and 
American Samoa. 

"(F) State tanf program. — The term 'State TANF 
program' means the temporary assistance for needy fami- 
lies program funded under part A of title IV. 

"(G) Tribal college or university. — The term 'Trib- 
al College or University' has the meaning given that term 
in section 316(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1059c(b)). 
"(b) Demonstration Project To Develop Training and Cer- 
tification Programs for Personal or Home Care Aides. — 

"(1) Authority to award grants. — Not later than 18 
months after the date of enactment of this section, the Sec- 
retary shall award grants to eligible entities that are States to 
conduct demonstration projects for purposes of developing core 
training competencies and certification programs for personal 
or home care aides. The Secretary shall — 

"(A) evaluate the efficacy of the core training com- 
petencies described in paragraph (3)(A) for newly hired 
personal or home care aides and the methods used by 
States to implement such core training competencies in ac- 
cordance with the issues specified in paragraph (3)(B); and 
"(B) ensure that the number of hours of training pro- 
vided by States under the demonstration project with re- 
spect to such core training competencies are not less than 
the number of hours of training required under any appli- 
cable State or Federal law or regulation. 
"(2) Duration. — A demonstration project shall be con- 
ducted under this subsection for not less than 3 years. 

"(3) Core training competencies for personal or home 
care aides. — 

"(A) In general. — The core training competencies for 
personal or home care aides described in this subpara- 
graph include competencies with respect to the following 
areas: 

"(i) The role of the personal or home care aide (in- 
cluding differences between a personal or home care 
aide employed by an agency and a personal or home 
care aide employed directly by the health care con- 
sumer or an independent provider). 

"(ii) Consumer rights, ethics, and confidentiality 
(including the role of proxy decision-makers in the 
case where a health care consumer has impaired deci- 
sion-making capacity). 

"(hi) Communication, cultural and linguistic com- 
petence and sensitivity, problem solving, behavior 
management, and relationship skills. 

"(iv) Personal care skills. 

"(v) Health care support. 

"(vi) Nutritional support. 

"(vii) Infection control. 

"(viii) Safety and emergency training. 

"(ix) Training specific to an individual consumer's 
needs (including older individuals, younger individuals 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5507\2008 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



598 



with disabilities, individuals with developmental dis- 
abilities, individuals with dementia, and individuals 
with mental and behavioral health needs). 

"(x) Self-Care. 
"(B) Implementation. — The implementation issues 
specified in this subparagraph include the following: 

"(i) The length of the training. 

"(ii) The appropriate trainer to student ratio. 

"(hi) The amount of instruction time spent in the 
classroom as compared to on-site in the home or a fa- 
cility. 

"(iv) Trainer qualifications. 

"(v) Content for a 'hands-on' and written certifi- 
cation exam. 

"(vi) Continuing education requirements. 
"(4) Application and selection criteria. — 
"(A) In general. — 

"(i) Number of states. — The Secretary shall 
enter into agreements with not more than 6 States to 
conduct demonstration projects under this subsection. 

"(ii) Requirements for states. — An agreement 
entered into under clause (i) shall require that a par- 
ticipating State — 

"(I) implement the core training competencies 
described in paragraph (3)(A); and 

"(II) develop written materials and protocols 
for such core training competencies, including the 
development of a certification test for personal or 
home care aides who have completed such train- 
ing competencies. 

"(hi) Consultation and collaboration with 
community and vocational colleges. — The Sec- 
retary shall encourage participating States to consult 
with community and vocational colleges regarding the 
development of curricula to implement the project 
with respect to activities, as applicable, which may in- 
clude consideration of such colleges as partners in 
such implementation. 

"(B) Application and eligibility. — A State seeking to 
participate in the project shall — 

"(i) submit an application to the Secretary con- 
taining such information and at such time as the Sec- 
retary may specify; 

"(ii) meet the selection criteria established under 
subparagraph (C); and 

"(hi) meet such additional criteria as the Sec- 
retary may specify. 

"(C) Selection criteria. — In selecting States to par- 
ticipate in the program, the Secretary shall establish cri- 
teria to ensure (if applicable with respect to the activities 
involved) — 

"(i) geographic and demographic diversity; 

June 9, 2010 



599 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5507X2008 SSA 



"(ii) that participating States offer medical assist- 
ance for personal care services under the State Med- 
icaid plan; 

"(hi) that the existing training standards for per- 
sonal or home care aides in each participating State — 
"(I) are different from such standards in the 
other participating States; and 

"(II) are different from the core training com- 
petencies described in paragraph (3)(A); 
"(iv) that participating States do not reduce the 
number of hours of training required under applicable 
State law or regulation after being selected to partici- 
pate in the project; and 

"(v) that participating States recruit a minimum 
number of eligible health and long-term care providers 
to participate in the project. 

"(D) Technical assistance. — The Secretary shall pro- 
vide technical assistance to States in developing written 
materials and protocols for such core training com- 
petencies. 

"(5) Evaluation and report. — 

"(A) Evaluation. — The Secretary shall develop an ex- 
perimental or control group testing protocol in consultation 
with an independent evaluation contractor selected by the 
Secretary. Such contractor shall evaluate — 

"(i) the impact of core training competencies de- 
scribed in paragraph (3)(A), including curricula devel- 
oped to implement such core training competencies, 
for personal or home care aides within each partici- 
pating State on job satisfaction, mastery of job skills, 
beneficiary and family caregiver satisfaction with serv- 
ices, and additional measures determined by the Sec- 
retary in consultation with the expert panel; 

"(ii) the impact of providing such core training 
competencies on the existing training infrastructure 
and resources of States; and 

"(hi) whether a minimum number of hours of ini- 
tial training should be required for personal or home 
care aides and, if so, what minimum number of hours 
should be required. 
"(B) Reports. — 

"(i) Report on initial implementation. — Not 
later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this 
section, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a re- 
port on the initial implementation of activities con- 
ducted under the demonstration project, including any 
available results of the evaluation conducted under 
subparagraph (A) with respect to such activities, to- 
gether with such recommendations for legislation or 
administrative action as the Secretary determines ap- 
propriate. 

"(ii) Final report. — Not later than 1 year after 
the completion of the demonstration project, the Sec- 
retary shall submit to Congress a report containing 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5507 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



600 



the results of the evaluation conducted under subpara- 
graph (A), together with such recommendations for 
legislation or administrative action as the Secretary 
determines appropriate. 
"(6) Definitions. — In this subsection: 

"(A) Eligible health and long-term care pro- 
vider. — The term 'eligible health and long-term care pro- 
vider' means a personal or home care agency (including 
personal or home care public authorities), a nursing home, 
a home health agency (as defined in section 1861(o)), or 
any other health care provider the Secretary determines 
appropriate which — 

"(i) is licensed or authorized to provide services in 
a participating State; and 

"(ii) receives payment for services under title XIX. 
"(B) Personal care services. — The term 'personal 
care services' has the meaning given such term for pur- 
poses of title XIX. 

"(C) Personal or home care aide. — The term 'per- 
sonal or home care aide' means an individual who helps in- 
dividuals who are elderly, disabled, ill, or mentally dis- 
abled (including an individual with Alzheimer's disease or 
other dementia) to live in their own home or a residential 
care facility (such as a nursing home, assisted living facil- 
ity, or any other facility the Secretary determines appro- 
priate) by providing routine personal care services and 
other appropriate services to the individual. 

"(D) State. — The term 'State' has the meaning given 
that term for purposes of title XIX. 
"(c) Funding. — 

"(1) In general. — Subject to paragraph (2), out of any 
funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, there are 
appropriated to the Secretary to carry out subsections (a) and 
(b), $85,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014. 

"(2) Training and certification programs for personal 
and home care aides. — With respect to the demonstration 
projects under subsection (b), the Secretary shall use 
$5,000,000 of the amount appropriated under paragraph (1) for 
each of fiscal years 2010 through 2012 to carry out such 
projects. No funds appropriated under paragraph (1) shall be 
used to carry out demonstration projects under subsection (b) 
after fiscal year 2012. 

"(d) NONAPPLICATION. — 

"(1) In general. — Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
preceding sections of this title shall not apply to grant awarded 
under this section. 

"(2) Limitations on use of grants. — Section 2005(a) 
(other than paragraph (6)) shall apply to a grant awarded 
under this section to the same extent and in the same manner 
as such section applies to payments to States under this title.", 
(b) Extension of Family-To-Family Health Information 
Centers. — Section 501(c)(l)(A)(iii) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 701(c)(l)(A)(iii)) is amended by striking "fiscal year 2009" 
and inserting "each of fiscal years 2009 through 2012". 

June 9, 2010 



601 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5508Y749A PHSA 



SEC. 5508. INCREASING TEACHING CAPACITY. 

(a) Teaching Health Centers Training and Enhance- 
ment.— Part C of title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 293k et. seq.), as amended by section 5303, is further 
amended by inserting after section 749 the following: 

"SEC. 749A [42 U.S.C. 2931-1]. TEACHING HEALTH CENTERS DEVELOP- 
MENT GRANTS. 

"(a) Program Authorized. — The Secretary may award grants 
under this section to teaching health centers for the purpose of es- 
tablishing new accredited or expanded primary care residency pro- 
grams. 

"(b) Amount and Duration. — Grants awarded under this sec- 
tion shall be for a term of not more than 3 years and the maximum 
award may not be more than $500,000. 

"(c) Use of Funds. — Amounts provided under a grant under 
this section shall be used to cover the costs of — 

"(1) establishing or expanding a primary care residency 
training program described in subsection (a), including costs 
associated with — 

"(A) curriculum development; 

"(B) recruitment, training and retention of residents 
and faculty: 

"(C) accreditation by the Accreditation Council for 
Graduate Medical Education (ACGME), the American Den- 
tal Association (ADA), or the American Osteopathic Asso- 
ciation (AO A); and 

"(D) faculty salaries during the development phase; 

and 

"(2) technical assistance provided by an eligible entity. 
"(d) Application. — A teaching health center seeking a grant 
under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at 
such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
Secretary may require. 

"(e) Preference for Certain Applications. — In selecting re- 
cipients for grants under this section, the Secretary shall give pref- 
erence to any such application that documents an existing affili- 
ation agreement with an area health education center program as 
defined in sections 751 and 799B. 
"(f) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(1) Eligible entity. — The term 'eligible entity' means an 
organization capable of providing technical assistance includ- 
ing an area health education center program as denned in sec- 
tions 751 and 799B. 

"(2) Primary care residency program. — The term 'pri- 
mary care residency program' means an approved graduate 
medical residency training program (as defined in section 
340H) in family medicine, internal medicine, pediatrics, inter- 
nal medicine-pediatrics, obstetrics and gynecology, psychiatry, 
general dentistry, pediatric dentistry, and geriatrics. 
"(3) Teaching health center. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'teaching health center' 
means an entity that — 

"(i) is a community based, ambulatory patient care 
center; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5508 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



602 



"(ii) operates a primary care residency program. 
"(B) Inclusion of certain entities. — Such term in- 
cludes the following: 

"(i) A Federally qualified health center (as defined 
in section 1905(1)(2)(B), of the Social Security Act). 

"(ii) A community mental health center (as de- 
fined in section 1861(ff)(3)(B) of the Social Security 
Act). 

"(hi) A rural health clinic, as defined in section 
1861(aa) of the Social Security Act. 

"(iv) A health center operated by the Indian 
Health Service, an Indian tribe or tribal organization, 
or an urban Indian organization (as defined in section 
4 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act). 

"(v) An entity receiving funds under title X of the 
Public Health Service Act. 
"(g) Authorization of Appropriations. — There is authorized 
to be appropriated, $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2010, $50,000,000 
for fiscal year 2011, $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2012, and such 
sums as may be necessary for each fiscal year thereafter to carry 
out this section. Not to exceed $5,000,000 annually may be used for 
technical assistance program grants.". 

(b) National Health Service Corps Teaching Capacity. — 
Section 338C(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
254m(a)) is amended to read as follows: 

"(a) Service in Full-time Clinical Practice. — Except as pro- 
vided in section 338D, each individual who has entered into a writ- 
ten contract with the Secretary under section 338A or 338B shall 
provide service in the full-time clinical practice of such individual's 
profession as a member of the Corps for the period of obligated 
service provided in such contract. The Secretary may treat teaching 
as clinical practice for up to 20 percent of such period of obligated 
service. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, with respect to a 
member of the Corps participating in the teaching health centers 
graduate medical education program under section 340H, for the 
purpose of calculating time spent in full-time clinical practice 
under this section, up to 50 percent of time spent teaching by such 
member may be counted toward his or her service obligation. [As 
revised by section 10501(n)(5)Y'. 

(c) Payments to Qualified Teaching Health Centers. — 
Part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b 
et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"Subpart XI — Support of Graduate Medical 
Education in Qualified Teaching Health Centers 

"SEC. 340H [42 U.S.C. 256h]. PROGRAM OF PAYMENTS TO TEACHING 
HEALTH CENTERS THAT OPERATE GRADUATE MEDICAL 
EDUCATION PROGRAMS. 

"(a) Payments. — Subject to subsection (h)(2), the Secretary 
shall make payments under this section for direct expenses and for 
indirect expenses to qualified teaching health centers that are list- 
ed as sponsoring institutions by the relevant accrediting body for 

June 9, 2010 



603 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 5508\340H PHSA 



expansion of existing or establishment of new approved graduate 
medical residency training programs. 
"(b) Amount of Payments. — 

"(1) In general. — Subject to paragraph (2), the amounts 
payable under this section to qualified teaching health centers 
for an approved graduate medical residency training program 
for a fiscal year are each of the following amounts: 

"(A) Direct expense amount. — The amount deter- 
mined under subsection (c) for direct expenses associated 
with sponsoring approved graduate medical residency 
training programs. 

"(B) Indirect expense amount. — The amount deter- 
mined under subsection (d) for indirect expenses associ- 
ated with the additional costs relating to teaching resi- 
dents in such programs. 
"(2) Capped amount. — 

"(A) In general. — The total of the payments made to 
qualified teaching health centers under paragraph (1)(A) 
or paragraph (1)(B) in a fiscal year shall not exceed the 
amount of funds appropriated under subsection (g) for 
such payments for that fiscal year. 

"(B) Limitation. — The Secretary shall limit the fund- 
ing of full-time equivalent residents in order to ensure the 
direct and indirect payments as determined under sub- 
section (c) and (d) do not exceed the total amount of funds 
appropriated in a fiscal year under subsection (g). 
"(c) Amount of Payment for Direct Graduate Medical 
Education. — 

"(1) In general. — The amount determined under this sub- 
section for payments to qualified teaching health centers for di- 
rect graduate expenses relating to approved graduate medical 
residency training programs for a fiscal year is equal to the 
product of — 

"(A) the updated national per resident amount for di- 
rect graduate medical education, as determined under 
paragraph (2); and 

"(B) the average number of full-time equivalent resi- 
dents in the teaching health center's graduate approved 
medical residency training programs as determined under 
section 1886(h)(4) of the Social Security Act (without re- 
gard to the limitation under subparagraph (F) of such sec- 
tion) during the fiscal year. 

"(2) Updated national per resident amount for direct 
graduate medical education. — The updated per resident 
amount for direct graduate medical education for a qualified 
teaching health center for a fiscal year is an amount deter- 
mined as follows: 

"(A) Determination of qualified teaching health 
center per resident amount. — The Secretary shall com- 
pute for each individual qualified teaching health center a 
per resident amount — 

"(i) by dividing the national average per resident 
amount computed under section 340E(c)(2)(D) into a 
wage-related portion and a non-wage related portion 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5508\340H PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



604 



by applying the proportion determined under subpara- 
graph (B); 

"(ii) by multiplying the wage-related portion by 
the factor applied under section 1886(d)(3)(E) of the 
Social Security Act (but without application of section 
4410 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (42 U.S.C. 
1395ww note)) during the preceding fiscal year for the 
teaching health center's area; and 

"(hi) by adding the non-wage-related portion to 
the amount computed under clause (ii). 
"(B) Updating rate. — The Secretary shall update 
such per resident amount for each such qualified teaching 
health center as determined appropriate by the Secretary. 
"(d) Amount of Payment for Indirect Medical Edu- 
cation. — 

"(1) In general. — The amount determined under this sub- 
section for payments to qualified teaching health centers for in- 
direct expenses associated with the additional costs of teaching 
residents for a fiscal year is equal to an amount determined 
appropriate by the Secretary. 

"(2) Factors. — In determining the amount under para- 
graph (1), the Secretary shall — 

"(A) evaluate indirect training costs relative to sup- 
porting a primary care residency program in qualified 
teaching health centers; and 

"(B) based on this evaluation, assure that the aggre- 
gate of the payments for indirect expenses under this sec- 
tion and the payments for direct graduate medical edu- 
cation as determined under subsection (c) in a fiscal year 
do not exceed the amount appropriated for such expenses 
as determined in subsection (g). 

"(3) Interim payment. — Before the Secretary makes a pay- 
ment under this subsection pursuant to a determination of in- 
direct expenses under paragraph (1), the Secretary may pro- 
vide to qualified teaching health centers a payment, in addi- 
tion to any payment made under subsection (c), for expected 
indirect expenses associated with the additional costs of teach- 
ing residents for a fiscal year, based on an estimate by the Sec- 
retary. 

"(e) Clarification Regarding Relationship to Other Pay- 
ments for Graduate Medical Education. — Payments under this 
section — 

"(1) shall be in addition to any payments — 

"(A) for the indirect costs of medical education under 

section 1886(d)(5)(B) of the Social Security Act; 

"(B) for direct graduate medical education costs under 

section 1886(h) of such Act; and 

"(C) for direct costs of medical education under section 

1886(k) of such Act; 

"(2) shall not be taken into account in applying the limita- 
tion on the number of total full-time equivalent residents 
under subparagraphs (F) and (G) of section 1886(h)(4) of such 
Act and clauses (v), (viXD, and (vi)QI) of section 1886(d)(5)(B) 

June 9, 2010 



605 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 5508\340H PHSA 



of such Act for the portion of time that a resident rotates to 
a hospital; and 

"(3) shall not include the time in which a resident is count- 
ed toward full-time equivalency by a hospital under paragraph 
(2) or under section 1886(d)(5)(B)(iv) of the Social Security Act, 
section 1886(h)(4)(E) of such Act, or section 340E of this Act. 
"(f) Reconciliation. — The Secretary shall determine any 
changes to the number of residents reported by a hospital in the 
application of the hospital for the current fiscal year to determine 
the final amount payable to the hospital for the current fiscal year 
for both direct expense and indirect expense amounts. Based on 
such determination, the Secretary shall recoup any overpayments 
made to pay any balance due to the extent possible. The final 
amount so determined shall be considered a final intermediary de- 
termination for the purposes of section 1878 of the Social Security 
Act and shall be subject to administrative and judicial review 
under that section in the same manner as the amount of payment 
under section 1186(d) of such Act is subject to review under such 
section. 

"(g) Funding. — To carry out this section, there are appro- 
priated such sums as may be necessary, not to exceed 
$230,000,000, for the period of fiscal years 2011 through 2015. 
"(h) Annual Reporting Required. — 

"(1) Annual report. — The report required under this 
paragraph for a qualified teaching health center for a fiscal 
year is a report that includes (in a form and manner specified 
by the Secretary) the following information for the residency 
academic year completed immediately prior to such fiscal year: 
"(A) The types of primary care resident approved 
training programs that the qualified teaching health cen- 
ter provided for residents. 

"(B) The number of approved training positions for 
residents described in paragraph (4). 

"(C) The number of residents described in paragraph 
(4) who completed their residency training at the end of 
such residency academic year and care for vulnerable pop- 
ulations living in underserved areas. 

"(D) Other information as deemed appropriate by the 
Secretary. 

"(2) Audit authority; limitation on payment. — 

"(A) Audit authority. — The Secretary may audit a 
qualified teaching health center to ensure the accuracy 
and completeness of the information submitted in a report 
under paragraph (1). 

"(B) Limitation on payment. — A teaching health cen- 
ter may only receive payment in a cost reporting period for 
a number of such resident positions that is greater than 
the base level of primary care resident positions, as deter- 
mined by the Secretary. For purposes of this subpara- 
graph, the "base level of primary care residents' for a 
teaching health center is the level of such residents as of 
a base period. 

"(3) Reduction in payment for failure to report. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5509 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



606 



"(A) In general. — The amount payable under this sec- 
tion to a qualified teaching health center for a fiscal year 
shall be reduced by at least 25 percent if the Secretary de- 
termines that — 

"(i) the qualified teaching health center has failed 
to provide the Secretary, as an addendum to the quali- 
fied teaching health center's application under this 
section for such fiscal year, the report required under 
paragraph (1) for the previous fiscal year; or 

"(ii) such report fails to provide complete and ac- 
curate information required under any subparagraph 
of such paragraph. 

"(B) Notice and opportunity to provide accurate 
and missing information. — Before imposing a reduction 
under subparagraph (A) on the basis of a qualified teach- 
ing health center's failure to provide complete and accu- 
rate information described in subparagraph (A)(ii), the 
Secretary shall provide notice to the teaching health center 
of such failure and the Secretary's intention to impose 
such reduction and shall provide the teaching health cen- 
ter with the opportunity to provide the required informa- 
tion within the period of 30 days beginning on the date of 
such notice. If the teaching health center provides such in- 
formation within such period, no reduction shall be made 
under subparagraph (A) on the basis of the previous fail- 
ure to provide such information. 

"(4) Residents. — The residents described in this para- 
graph are those who are in part-time or full-time equivalent 
resident training positions at a qualified teaching health center 
in any approved graduate medical residency training program, 
"(i) Regulations. — The Secretary shall promulgate regulations 
to carry out this section. 

"(j) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(1) Approved graduate medical residency training 
program. — The term 'approved graduate medical residency 
training program' means a residency or other postgraduate 
medical training program — 

"(A) participation in which may be counted toward cer- 
tification in a specialty or subspecialty and includes formal 
postgraduate training programs in geriatric medicine ap- 
proved by the Secretary; and 

"(B) that meets criteria for accreditation (as estab- 
lished by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical 
Education, the American Osteopathic Association, or the 
American Dental Association). 

"(2) Primary care residency program. — The term 'pri- 
mary care residency program' has the meaning given that term 
in section 749A. 

"(3) Qualified teaching health center. — The term 
'qualified teaching health center' has the meaning given the 
term 'teaching health center' in section 749A.". 

SEC. 5509 [42 U.S.C. 1395ww note]. GRADUATE NURSE EDUCATION DEM- 
ONSTRATION. 

(a) In General. — 

June 9, 2010 



607 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5509 



(1) Establishment. — 

(A) In general. — The Secretary shall establish a 
graduate nurse education demonstration under title XVIII 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) under 
which an eligible hospital may receive payment for the 
hospital's reasonable costs (described in paragraph (2)) for 
the provision of qualified clinical training to advance prac- 
tice nurses. 

(B) Number. — The demonstration shall include up to 
5 eligible hospitals. 

(C) Written agreements. — Eligible hospitals selected 
to participate in the demonstration shall enter into written 
agreements pursuant to subsection (b) in order to reim- 
burse the eligible partners of the hospital the share of the 
costs attributable to each partner. 

(2) Costs described. — 

(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (B) and 
subsection (d), the costs described in this paragraph are 
the reasonable costs (as described in section 186 l(v) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(v))) of each eligible 
hospital for the clinical training costs (as determined by 
the Secretary) that are attributable to providing advanced 
practice registered nurses with qualified training. 

(B) Limitation. — With respect to a year, the amount 
reimbursed under subparagraph (A) may not exceed the 
amount of costs described in subparagraph (A) that are at- 
tributable to an increase in the number of advanced prac- 
tice registered nurses enrolled in a program that provides 
qualified training during the year and for which the hos- 
pital is being reimbursed under the demonstration, as 
compared to the average number of advanced practice reg- 
istered nurses who graduated in each year during the pe- 
riod beginning on January 1, 2006, and ending on Decem- 
ber 31, 2010 (as determined by the Secretary) from the 
graduate nursing education program operated by the ap- 
plicable school of nursing that is an eligible partner of the 
hospital for purposes of the demonstration. 

(3) Waiver authority. — The Secretary may waive such re- 
quirements of titles XI and XVIII of the Social Security Act as 
may be necessary to carry out the demonstration. 

(4) Administration. — Chapter 35 of title 44, United States 
Code, shall not apply to the implementation of this section. 

(b) Written Agreements With Eligible Partners. — No pay- 
ment shall be made under this section to an eligible hospital unless 
such hospital has in effect a written agreement with the eligible 
partners of the hospital. Such written agreement shall describe, at 
a minimum — 

(1) the obligations of the eligible partners with respect to 
the provision of qualified training; and 

(2) the obligation of the eligible hospital to reimburse such 
eligible partners applicable (in a timely manner) for the costs 
of such qualified training attributable to partner. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5509 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



608 



(c) Evaluation. — Not later than October 17, 2017, the Sec- 
retary shall submit to Congress a report on the demonstration. 
Such report shall include an analysis of the following: 

(1) The growth in the number of advanced practice reg- 
istered nurses with respect to a specific base year as a result 
of the demonstration. 

(2) The growth for each of the specialties described in sub- 
paragraphs (A) through (D) of subsection (e)(1). 

(3) The costs to the Medicare program under title XVIII of 
the Social Security Act as a result of the demonstration. 

(4) Other items the Secretary determines appropriate and 
relevant. 

(d) Funding. — 

(1) In general. — There is hereby appropriated to the Sec- 
retary, out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise appro- 
priated, $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2012 through 2015 
to carry out this section, including the design, implementation, 
monitoring, and evaluation of the demonstration. 

(2) Proration. — If the aggregate payments to eligible hos- 
pitals under the demonstration exceed $50,000,000 for a fiscal 
year described in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall prorate the 
payment amounts to each eligible hospital in order to ensure 
that the aggregate payments do not exceed such amount. 

(3) Without fiscal year limitation. — Amounts appro- 
priated under this subsection shall remain available without 
fiscal year limitation. 

(e) Definitions. — In this section: 

(1) Advanced practice registered nurse. — The term 
"advanced practice registered nurse" includes the following: 

(A) A clinical nurse specialist (as defined in subsection 
(aa)(5) of section 1861 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395x)). 

(B) A nurse practitioner (as defined in such sub- 
section). 

(C) A certified registered nurse anesthetist (as defined 
in subsection (bb)(2) of such section). 

(D) A certified nurse-midwife (as defined in subsection 
(gg)(2) of such section). 

(2) Applicable non-hospital community-based care 
setting. — The term "applicable non-hospital community-based 
care setting" means a non-hospital community-based care set- 
ting which has entered into a written agreement (as described 
in subsection (b)) with the eligible hospital participating in the 
demonstration. Such settings include Federally qualified health 
centers, rural health clinics, and other non-hospital settings as 
determined appropriate by the Secretary. 

(3) Applicable school of nursing. — The term "applicable 
school of nursing" means an accredited school of nursing (as 
defined in section 801 of the Public Health Service Act) which 
has entered into a written agreement (as described in sub- 
section (b)) with the eligible hospital participating in the dem- 
onstration. 

June 9, 2010 



609 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5601 



(4) Demonstration. — The term "demonstration" means 
the graduate nurse education demonstration established under 
subsection (a). 

(5) Eligible hospital. — The term "eligible hospital" 
means a hospital (as defined in subsection (e) of section 1861 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x)) or a critical access 
hospital (as defined in subsection (mm)(l) of such section) that 
has a written agreement in place with — 

(A) 1 or more applicable schools of nursing; and 

(B) 2 or more applicable non-hospital community- 
based care settings. 

(6) Eligible partners. — The term "eligible partners" in- 
cludes the following: 

(A) An applicable non-hospital community-based care 
setting. 

(B) An applicable school of nursing. 

(7) Qualified training. — 

(A) In general. — The term "qualified training" means 
training — 

(i) that provides an advanced practice registered 
nurse with the clinical skills necessary to provide pri- 
mary care, preventive care, transitional care, chronic 
care management, and other services appropriate for 
individuals entitled to, or enrolled for, benefits under 
part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act, or en- 
rolled under part B of such title; and 

(ii) subject to subparagraph (B), at least half of 
which is provided in a non-hospital community-based 
care setting. 

(B) Waiver of requirement half of training be 

PROVIDED IN NON-HOSPITAL COMMUNITY-BASED CARE SET- 
TING IN CERTAIN AREAS. — The Secretary may waive the re- 
quirement under subparagraph (A)(ii) with respect to eligi- 
ble hospitals located in rural or medically underserved 
areas. 

(8) Secretary. — The term "Secretary" means the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services. 

Subtitle G — Improving Access to Health 
Care Services 

SEC. 5601. SPENDING FOR FEDERALLY QUALIFIED HEALTH CENTERS 
(FQHCS). 

(a) In General. — Section 330(r) of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 254b(r)) is amended by striking paragraph (1) and 
inserting the following: 

"(1) General amounts for grants. — For the purpose of 
carrying out this section, in addition to the amounts authorized 
to be appropriated under subsection (d), there is authorized to 
be appropriated the following: 

"(A) For fiscal year 2010, $2,988,821,592. 
"(B) For fiscal year 2011, $3,862,107,440. 
"(C) For fiscal year 2012, $4,990,553,440. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5602 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



610 



"(D) For fiscal year 2013, $6,448,713,307. 
"(E) For fiscal year 2014, $7,332,924,155. 
"(F) For fiscal year 2015, $8,332,924,155. 
"(G) For fiscal year 2016, and each subsequent fiscal 
year, the amount appropriated for the preceding fiscal year 
adjusted by the product of — 

"(i) one plus the average percentage increase in 
costs incurred per patient served; and 

"(ii) one plus the average percentage increase in 
the total number of patients served.", 
(b) Rule of Construction— Section 330(r) of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b(r)) is amended by adding at the 
end the following: 

"(4) Rule of construction with respect to rural 
health clinics. — 

"(A) In general. — Nothing in this section shall be con- 
strued to prevent a community health center from con- 
tracting with a Federally certified rural health clinic (as 
defined in section 1861(aa)(2) of the Social Security Act), 
a low-volume hospital (as defined for purposes of section 
1886 of such Act), a critical access hospital, a sole commu- 
nity hospital (as defined for purposes of section 
1886(d)(5)(D)(iii) of such Act), or a medicare-dependent 
share hospital (as defined for purposes of section 
1886(d)(5)(G)(iv) of such Act) for the delivery of primary 
health care services that are available at the clinic or hos- 
pital to individuals who would otherwise be eligible for 
free or reduced cost care if that individual were able to ob- 
tain that care at the community health center. Such serv- 
ices may be limited in scope to those primary health care 
services available in that clinic or hospitals. 

"(B) Assurances. — In order for a clinic or hospital to 
receive funds under this section through a contract with a 
community health center under subparagraph (A), such 
clinic or hospital shall establish policies to ensure — 

"(i) nondiscrimination based on the ability of a pa- 
tient to pay; and 

"(ii) the establishment of a sliding fee scale for 
low-income patients.". 

SEC. 5602. NEGOTIATED RULEMAKING FOR DEVELOPMENT OF METH- 
ODOLOGY AND CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATING MEDICALLY 
UNDERSERVED POPULATIONS AND HEALTH PROFES- 
SIONS SHORTAGE AREAS. 

(a) Establishment. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services (in this section referred to as the "Secretary") shall es- 
tablish, through a negotiated rulemaking process under sub- 
chapter 3 of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, a com- 
prehensive methodology and criteria for designation of — 

(A) medically underserved populations in accordance 
with section 330(b)(3) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 254b(b)(3)); 

(B) health professions shortage areas under section 
332 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254e). 

June 9, 2010 



611 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5602 



(2) Factors to consider. — In establishing the method- 
ology and criteria under paragraph (1), the Secretary — 

(A) shall consult with relevant stakeholders who will 
be significantly affected by a rule (such as national, State 
and regional organizations representing affected entities), 
State health offices, community organizations, health cen- 
ters and other affected entities, and other interested par- 
ties; and 

(B) shall take into account — 

(i) the timely availability and appropriateness of 
data used to determine a designation to potential ap- 
plicants for such designations; 

(ii) the impact of the methodology and criteria on 
communities of various types and on health centers 
and other safety net providers; 

(iii) the degree of ease or difficulty that will face 
potential applicants for such designations in securing 
the necessary data; and 

(iv) the extent to which the methodology accu- 
rately measures various barriers that confront individ- 
uals and population groups in seeking health care 
services. 

(b) Publication of Notice. — In carrying out the rulemaking 
process under this subsection, the Secretary shall publish the no- 
tice provided for under section 564(a) of title 5, United States Code, 
by not later than 45 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act. 

(c) Target Date for Publication of Rule. — As part of the 
notice under subsection (b), and for purposes of this subsection, the 
"target date for publication", as referred to in section 564(a)(5) of 
title 5, United Sates Code, shall be July 1, 2010. 

(d) Appointment of Negotiated Rulemaking Committee 
and Facilitator. — The Secretary shall provide for — 

(1) the appointment of a negotiated rulemaking committee 
under section 565(a) of title 5, United States Code, by not later 
than 30 days after the end of the comment period provided for 
under section 564(c) of such title; and 

(2) the nomination of a facilitator under section 566(c) of 
such title 5 by not later than 10 days after the date of appoint- 
ment of the committee. 

(e) Preliminary Committee Report. — The negotiated rule- 
making committee appointed under subsection (d) shall report to 
the Secretary, by not later than April 1, 2010, regarding the com- 
mittee's progress on achieving a consensus with regard to the rule- 
making proceeding and whether such consensus is likely to occur 
before one month before the target date for publication of the rule. 
If the committee reports that the committee has failed to make sig- 
nificant progress toward such consensus or is unlikely to reach 
such consensus by the target date, the Secretary may terminate 
such process and provide for the publication of a rule under this 
section through such other methods as the Secretary may provide. 

(f) Final Committee Report. — If the committee is not termi- 
nated under subsection (e), the rulemaking committee shall submit 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5603 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



612 



a report containing a proposed rule by not later than one month 
before the target publication date. 

(g) Interim Final Effect. — The Secretary shall publish a rule 
under this section in the Federal Register by not later than the tar- 
get publication date. Such rule shall be effective and final imme- 
diately on an interim basis, but is subject to change and revision 
after public notice and opportunity for a period (of not less than 90 
days) for public comment. In connection with such rule, the Sec- 
retary shall specify the process for the timely review and approval 
of applications for such designations pursuant to such rules and 
consistent with this section. 

(h) Publication of Rule After Public Comment. — The Sec- 
retary shall provide for consideration of such comments and repub- 
lication of such rule by not later than 1 year after the target publi- 
cation date. 

SEC. 5603. REAUTHORIZATION OF THE WAKEFIELD EMERGENCY MED- 
ICAL SERVICES FOR CHILDREN PROGRAM. 

Section 1910 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300w- 
9) is amended — 

(1) in subsection (a), by striking "3-year period (with an op- 
tional 4th year" and inserting "4-year period (with an optional 
5th year"; and 

(2) in subsection (d) — 

(A) by striking "and such sums" and inserting "such 
sums"; and 

(B) by inserting before the period the following: ", 
$25,000,000 for fiscal year 2010, $26,250,000 for fiscal year 
2011, $27,562,500 for fiscal year 2012, $28,940,625 for fis- 
cal year 2013, and $30,387,656 for fiscal year 2014". 

SEC. 5604. CO-LOCATING PRIMARY AND SPECIALTY CARE IN COMMU- 
NITY-BASED MENTAL HEALTH SETTINGS. 

Subpart 3 of part B of title V of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 290bb-31 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following: 

"SEC. 520K [42 U.S.C. 290bb-42]. AWARDS FOR CO-LOCATING PRIMARY 
AND SPECIALTY CARE IN COMMUNITY-BASED MENTAL 
HEALTH SETTINGS. 

"(a) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(1) Eligible entity. — The term 'eligible entity' means a 
qualified community mental health program defined under sec- 
tion 1913(b)(1). 

"(2) Special populations. — The term 'special populations' 
means adults with mental illnesses who have co-occurring pri- 
mary care conditions and chronic diseases. 
"(b) Program Authorized. — The Secretary, acting through the 
Administrator shall award grants and cooperative agreements to 
eligible entities to establish demonstration projects for the provi- 
sion of coordinated and integrated services to special populations 
through the co-location of primary and specialty care services in 
community-based mental and behavioral health settings. 

"(c) Application. — To be eligible to receive a grant or coopera- 
tive agreement under this section, an eligible entity shall submit 
an application to the Administrator at such time, in such manner, 

June 9, 2010 



613 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5605 



and accompanied by such information as the Administrator may re- 
quire, including a description of partnerships, or other arrange- 
ments with local primary care providers, including community 
health centers, to provide services to special populations. 

"(d) Use of Funds. — 

"(1) In general. — For the benefit of special populations, 

an eligible entity shall use funds awarded under this section 

for — 

"(A) the provision, by qualified primary care profes- 
sionals, of on site primary care services; 

"(B) reasonable costs associated with medically nec- 
essary referrals to qualified specialty care professionals, 
other coordinators of care or, if permitted by the terms of 
the grant or cooperative agreement, by qualified specialty 
care professionals on a reasonable cost basis on site at the 
eligible entity; 

"(C) information technology required to accommodate 
the clinical needs of primary and specialty care profes- 
sionals; or 

"(D) facility modifications needed to bring primary and 
specialty care professionals on site at the eligible entity. 
"(2) Limitation. — Not to exceed 15 percent of grant or co- 
operative agreement funds may be used for activities described 
in subparagraphs (C) and (D) of paragraph (1). 
"(e) Evaluation. — Not later than 90 days after a grant or co- 
operative agreement awarded under this section expires, an eligible 
entity shall submit to the Secretary the results of an evaluation to 
be conducted by the entity concerning the effectiveness of the ac- 
tivities carried out under the grant or agreement. 

"(f) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are authorized 
to be appropriated to carry out this section, $50,000,000 for fiscal 
year 2010 and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal 
years 2011 through 2014.". 

SEC. 5605 [36 U.S.C. 150303 note]. KEY NATIONAL INDICATORS. 

(a) Definitions. — In this section: 

(1) Academy. — The term "Academy" means the National 
Academy of Sciences. 

(2) Commission. — The term "Commission" means the Com- 
mission on Key National Indicators established under sub- 
section (b). 

(3) Institute. — The term "Institute" means a Key Na- 
tional Indicators Institute as designated under subsection 

(0(3). 

(b) Commission on Key National Indicators. — 

(1) Establishment. — There is established a "Commission 
on Key National Indicators". 

(2) Membership. — 

(A) Number and appointment. — The Commission 
shall be composed of 8 members, to be appointed equally 
by the majority and minority leaders of the Senate and the 
Speaker and minority leader of the House of Representa- 
tives. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5605 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



614 



(B) Prohibited appointments. — Members of the Com- 
mission shall not include Members of Congress or other 
elected Federal, State, or local government officials. 

(C) Qualifications. — In making appointments under 
subparagraph (A), the majority and minority leaders of the 
Senate and the Speaker and minority leader of the House 
of Representatives shall appoint individuals who have 
shown a dedication to improving civic dialogue and deci- 
sion-making through the wide use of scientific evidence 
and factual information. 

(D) Period of appointment. — Each member of the 
Commission shall be appointed for a 2-year term, except 
that 1 initial appointment shall be for 3 years. Any vacan- 
cies shall not affect the power and duties of the Commis- 
sion but shall be filled in the same manner as the original 
appointment and shall last only for the remainder of that 
term. 

(E) Date. — Members of the Commission shall be ap- 
pointed by not later than 30 days after the date of enact- 
ment of this Act. 

(F) Initial organizing period. — Not later than 60 
days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commis- 
sion shall develop and implement a schedule for comple- 
tion of the review and reports required under subsection 
(d). 

(G) Co-chairpersons. — The Commission shall select 2 
Co-Chairpersons from among its members. 

(c) Duties of the Commission. — 

(1) In general. — The Commission shall — 

(A) conduct comprehensive oversight of a newly estab- 
lished key national indicators system consistent with the 
purpose described in this subsection; 

(B) make recommendations on how to improve the key 
national indicators system; 

(C) coordinate with Federal Government users and in- 
formation providers to assure access to relevant and qual- 
ity data; and 

(D) enter into contracts with the Academy. 

(2) Reports — 

(A) Annual report to congress. — Not later than 1 
year after the selection of the 2 Co-Chairpersons of the 
Commission, and each subsequent year thereafter, the 
Commission shall prepare and submit to the appropriate 
Committees of Congress and the President a report that 
contains a detailed statement of the recommendations, 
findings, and conclusions of the Commission on the activi- 
ties of the Academy and a designated Institute related to 
the establishment of a Key National Indicator System. 

(B) Annual report to the academy. — 

(i) In general. — Not later than 6 months after 
the selection of the 2 Co-Chairpersons of the Commis- 
sion, and each subsequent year thereafter, the Com- 
mission shall prepare and submit to the Academy and 
a designated Institute a report making recommenda- 

June 9, 2010 



615 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5605 



tions concerning potential issue areas and key indica- 
tors to be included in the Key National Indicators. 

(ii) Limitation. — The Commission shall not have 
the authority to direct the Academy or, if established, 
the Institute, to adopt, modify, or delete any key indi- 
cators. 

(3) Contract with the national academy of 
sciences. — 

(A) In general. As soon as practicable after the se- 
lection of the 2 Co-Chairpersons of the Commission, the 
Co-Chairpersons shall enter into an arrangement with the 
National Academy of Sciences under which the Academy 
shall— 

(i) review available public and private sector re- 
search on the selection of a set of key national indica- 
tors; 

(ii) determine how best to establish a key national 
indicator system for the United States, by either cre- 
ating its own institutional capability or designating an 
independent private nonprofit organization as an In- 
stitute to implement a key national indicator system; 

(iii) if the Academy designates an independent In- 
stitute under clause (ii), provide scientific and tech- 
nical advice to the Institute and create an appropriate 
governance mechanism that balances Academy in- 
volvement and the independence of the Institute; and 

(iv) provide an annual report to the Commission 
addressing scientific and technical issues related to 
the key national indicator system and, if established, 
the Institute, and governance of the Institute's budget 
and operations. 

(B) Participation. — In executing the arrangement 
under subparagraph (A), the National Academy of Sciences 
shall convene a multi-sector, multi-disciplinary process to 
define major scientific and technical issues associated with 
developing, maintaining, and evolving a Key National Indi- 
cator System and, if an Institute is established, to provide 
it with scientific and technical advice. 

(C) Establishment of a key national indicator 

SYSTEM. — 

(i) In general. — In executing the arrangement 
under subparagraph (A), the National Academy of 
Sciences shall enable the establishment of a key na- 
tional indicator system by — 

(I) creating its own institutional capability; or 

(II) partnering with an independent private 
nonprofit organization as an Institute to imple- 
ment a key national indicator system. 

(ii) Institute. — If the Academy designates an In- 
stitute under clause (i)(II), such Institute shall be a 
non-profit entity (as defined for purposes of section 
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) with 
an educational mission, a governance structure that 
emphasizes independence, and characteristics that 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 5605 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



616 



make such entity appropriate for establishing a key 
national indicator system. 

(iii) Responsibilities. — Either the Academy or 
the Institute designated under clause (i)(II) shall be 
responsible for the following: 

(I) Identifying and selecting issue areas to be 
represented by the key national indicators. 

(II) Identifying and selecting the measures 
used for key national indicators within the issue 
areas under subclause (I). 

(III) Identifying and selecting data to populate 
the key national indicators described under sub- 
clause (II). 

(IV) Designing, publishing, and maintaining a 
public website that contains a freely accessible 
database allowing public access to the key na- 
tional indicators. 

(V) Developing a quality assurance framework 
to ensure rigorous and independent processes and 
the selection of quality data. 

(VI) Developing a budget for the construction 
and management of a sustainable, adaptable, and 
evolving key national indicator system that re- 
flects all Commission funding of Academy and, if 
an Institute is established, Institute activities. 

(VII) Reporting annually to the Commission 
regarding its selection of issue areas, key indica- 
tors, data, and progress toward establishing a 
web-accessible database. 

(VIII) Responding directly to the Commission 
in response to any Commission recommendations 
and to the Academy regarding any inquiries by 
the Academy. 

(iv) Governance. — Upon the establishment of a 
key national indicator system, the Academy shall cre- 
ate an appropriate governance mechanism that incor- 
porates advisory and control functions. If an Institute 
is designated under clause (i)(II), the governance 
mechanism shall balance appropriate Academy in- 
volvement and the independence of the Institute. 

(v) Modification and changes. — The Academy 
shall retain the sole discretion, at any time, to alter its 
approach to the establishment of a key national indi- 
cator system or, if an Institute is designated under 
clause (i)(II), to alter any aspect of its relationship 
with the Institute or to designate a different non-profit 
entity to serve as the Institute. 

(vi) Construction. — Nothing in this section shall 
be construed to limit the ability of the Academy or the 
Institute designated under clause (i)(II) to receive pri- 
vate funding for activities related to the establishment 
of a key national indicator system. 

(D) Annual report. — As part of the arrangement 
under subparagraph (A), the National Academy of Sciences 

June 9, 2010 



617 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 5606 



shall, not later than 270 days after the date of enactment 
of this Act, and annually thereafter, submit to the Co- 
Chairpersons of the Commission a report that contains the 
findings and recommendations of the Academy. 

(d) Government Accountability Office Study and Re- 
port. — 

(1) GAO study. — The Comptroller General of the United 
States shall conduct a study of previous work conducted by all 
public agencies, private organizations, or foreign countries with 
respect to best practices for a key national indicator system. 
The study shall be submitted to the appropriate authorizing 
committees of Congress. 

(2) GAO financial audit. — If an Institute is established 
under this section, the Comptroller General shall conduct an 
annual audit of the financial statements of the Institute, in ac- 
cordance with generally accepted government auditing stand- 
ards and submit a report on such audit to the Commission and 
the appropriate authorizing committees of Congress. 

(3) GAO programmatic review. — The Comptroller Gen- 
eral of the United States shall conduct programmatic assess- 
ments of the Institute established under this section as deter- 
mined necessary by the Comptroller General and report the 
findings to the Commission and to the appropriate authorizing 
committees of Congress. 

(e) Authorization of Appropriations. — 

(1) In general. — There are authorized to be appropriated 
to carry out the purposes of this section, $10,000,000 for fiscal 
year 2010, and $7,500,000 for each of fiscal year 2011 through 
2018. 

(2) Availability. — Amounts appropriated under paragraph 
(1) shall remain available until expended. 

SEC. 5606 [42 U.S.C. 254b-l]. STATE GRANTS TO HEALTH CARE PRO- 
VIDERS WHO PROVIDE SERVICES TO A HIGH PERCENT- 
AGE OF MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED POPULATIONS OR 
OTHER SPECIAL POPULATIONS. 

[Section added by section 10501(kj\ 

(a) In General. — A State may award grants to health care 
providers who treat a high percentage, as determined by such 
State, of medically underserved populations or other special popu- 
lations in such State. 

(b) Source of Funds. — A grant program established by a 
State under subsection (a) may not be established within a depart- 
ment, agency, or other entity of such State that administers the 
Medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396 et seq.), and no Federal or State funds allocated to 
such Medicaid program, the Medicare program under title XVIII of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.), or the TRICARE 
program under chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, may be 
used to award grants or to pay administrative costs associated with 
a grant program established under subsection (a). 



Sec. 5701 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



618 



Subtitle H — General Provisions 

SEC. 5701. REPORTS. 

(a) Reports by Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices. — On an annual basis, the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services shall submit to the appropriate Committees of Congress a 
report on the activities carried out under the amendments made by 
this title, and the effectiveness of such activities. 

(b) Reports by Recipients of Funds. — The Secretary of 
Health and Human Services may require, as a condition of receiv- 
ing funds under the amendments made by this title, that the entity 
receiving such award submit to such Secretary such reports as the 
such Secretary may require on activities carried out with such 
award, and the effectiveness of such activities. 

[Miscellaneous additional amendments made to the Public 
Health Service Act by section 10501(d), (g), (I), (m), &amp; (n); by section 
10502; and by section 105031 



619 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6001 



TITLE VI— TRANSPARENCY AND 
PROGRAM INTEGRITY 

Subtitle A — Physician Ownership and 
Other Transparency 

SEC. 6001. LIMITATION ON MEDICARE EXCEPTION TO THE PROHIBI- 
TION ON CERTAIN PHYSICIAN REFERRALS FOR HOS- 
PITALS. 

(a) In General. — Section 1877 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395nn) is amended— 

(1) in subsection (d)(2) — 

(A) in subparagraph (A), by striking "and" at the end; 

(B) in subparagraph (B), by striking the period at the 
end and inserting "; and"; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following new subpara- 
graph: 

"(C) in the case where the entity is a hospital, the hos- 
pital meets the requirements of paragraph (3)(D)."; 

(2) in subsection (d)(3) — 

(A) in subparagraph (B), by striking "and" at the end; 

(B) in subparagraph (C), by striking the period at the 
end and inserting "; and"; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following new subpara- 
graph: 

"(D) the hospital meets the requirements described in 
subsection (i)(l) not later than 18 months after the date of 
the enactment of this subparagraph."; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following new subsection: 

"(i) Requirements for Hospitals To Qualify for Rural 
Provider and Hospital Exception to Ownership or Invest- 
ment Prohibition. — 

"(1) Requirements described. — For purposes of sub- 
section (d)(3)(D), the requirements described in this paragraph 
for a hospital are as follows: 

"(A) Provider agreement. — The hospital had — 

"(i) physician ownership or investment on Decem- 
ber 31, 2010; and [section 10601(a)(1) amended this 
clause by striking 'February V and inserting 'August 1'; 
section 1106(1) of HCERA further amended this clause 
by striking 'August 1, 2010' and inserting 'December 
31, 2010'; shown to reflect probable intent\ 

"(ii) a provider agreement under section 1866 in 
effect on such date. 

"(B) Limitation on expansion of facility capac- 
ity. — Except as provided in paragraph (3), the number of 
operating rooms, procedure rooms, and beds for which the 
hospital is licensed at any time on or after the date of the 
enactment of this subsection is no greater than the num- 
ber of operating rooms, procedure rooms, and beds for 
which the hospital is licensed as of such date. 

"(C) Preventing conflicts of interest. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6001 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



620 



"(i) The hospital submits to the Secretary an an- 
nual report containing a detailed description of — 

"(I) the identity of each physician owner or in- 
vestor and any other owners or investors of the 
hospital; and 

"(II) the nature and extent of all ownership 
and investment interests in the hospital, 
"(ii) The hospital has procedures in place to re- 
quire that any referring physician owner or investor 
discloses to the patient being referred, by a time that 
permits the patient to make a meaningful decision re- 
garding the receipt of care, as determined by the Sec- 
retary — 

"(I) the ownership or investment interest, as 
applicable, of such referring physician in the hos- 
pital; and 

"(II) if applicable, any such ownership or in- 
vestment interest of the treating physician, 
"(hi) The hospital does not condition any physician 
ownership or investment interests either directly or 
indirectly on the physician owner or investor making 
or influencing referrals to the hospital or otherwise 
generating business for the hospital. 

"(iv) The hospital discloses the fact that the hos- 
pital is partially owned or invested in by physicians — 
"(I) on any public website for the hospital; and 
"(II) in any public advertising for the hospital. 
"(D) Ensuring bona fide investment. — 

"(i) The percentage of the total value of the owner- 
ship or investment interests held in the hospital, or in 
an entity whose assets include the hospital, by physi- 
cian owners or investors in the aggregate does not ex- 
ceed such percentage as of the date of enactment of 
this subsection. 

"(ii) Any ownership or investment interests that 
the hospital offers to a physician owner or investor are 
not offered on more favorable terms than the terms of- 
fered to a person who is not a physician owner or in- 
vestor. 

"(hi) The hospital (or any owner or investor in the 
hospital) does not directly or indirectly provide loans 
or financing for any investment in the hospital by a 
physician owner or investor. 

"(iv) The hospital (or any owner or investor in the 
hospital) does not directly or indirectly guarantee a 
loan, make a payment toward a loan, or otherwise 
subsidize a loan, for any individual physician owner or 
investor or group of physician owners or investors that 
is related to acquiring any ownership or investment 
interest in the hospital. 

"(v) Ownership or investment returns are distrib- 
uted to each owner or investor in the hospital in an 
amount that is directly proportional to the ownership 

June 9, 2010 



621 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6001 



or investment interest of such owner or investor in the 
hospital. 

"(vi) Physician owners and investors do not re- 
ceive, directly or indirectly, any guaranteed receipt of 
or right to purchase other business interests related to 
the hospital, including the purchase or lease of any 
property under the control of other owners or investors 
in the hospital or located near the premises of the hos- 
pital. 

"(vii) The hospital does not offer a physician 
owner or investor the opportunity to purchase or lease 
any property under the control of the hospital or any 
other owner or investor in the hospital on more favor- 
able terms than the terms offered to an individual who 
is not a physician owner or investor. 
"(E) Patient safety. — 

"(i) Insofar as the hospital admits a patient and 
does not have any physician available on the premises 
to provide services during all hours in which the hos- 
pital is providing services to such patient, before ad- 
mitting the patient — 

"(I) the hospital discloses such fact to a pa- 
tient; and 

"(II) following such disclosure, the hospital re- 
ceives from the patient a signed acknowledgment 
that the patient understands such fact, 
"(ii) The hospital has the capacity to — 

"(I) provide assessment and initial treatment 
for patients; and 

"(II) refer and transfer patients to hospitals 
with the capability to treat the needs of the pa- 
tient involved. 
"(F) Limitation on application to certain con- 
verted facilities. — The hospital was not converted from 
an ambulatory surgical center to a hospital on or after the 
date of enactment of this subsection. 

"(2) Publication of information reported. — The Sec- 
retary shall publish, and update on an annual basis, the infor- 
mation submitted by hospitals under paragraph (l)(C)(i) on the 
public Internet website of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid 
Services. 

"(3) Exception to prohibition on expansion of facility 
capacity. — 

"(A) Process. — 

"(i) Establishment. — The Secretary shall estab- 
lish and implement a process under which a hospital 
that is an applicable hospital (as defined in subpara- 
graph (E)) or is a high Medicaid facility described in 
subparagraph (F) may apply for an exception from the 
requirement under paragraph (1)(B). [As revised by 
section 1106(2)(A) of HCERA~\ 

"(ii) Opportunity for community input. — The 
process under clause (i) shall provide individuals and 
entities in the community in which the applicable hos- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6001 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



622 



pital applying for an exception is located with the op- 
portunity to provide input with respect to the applica- 
tion. 

"(hi) Timing for implementation. — The Sec- 
retary shall implement the process under clause (i) on 
February 1, 2012. [As revised by section 
10601(a)(2)(A)] 

"(iv) Regulations. — Not later than January 1, 
2012, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations to 
carry out the process under clause (i). [As revised by 
section 10601(a)(2)(B)] 

"(B) Frequency. — The process described in subpara- 
graph (A) shall permit an applicable hospital to apply for 
an exception up to once every 2 years. 
"(C) Permitted increase. — 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii) and sub- 
paragraph (D), an applicable hospital granted an ex- 
ception under the process described in subparagraph 
(A) may increase the number of operating rooms, pro- 
cedure rooms, and beds for which the applicable hos- 
pital is licensed above the baseline number of oper- 
ating rooms, procedure rooms, and beds of the applica- 
ble hospital (or, if the applicable hospital has been 
granted a previous exception under this paragraph, 
above the number of operating rooms, procedure 
rooms, and beds for which the hospital is licensed 
after the application of the most recent increase under 
such an exception). 

"(ii) 100 percent increase limitation. — The Sec- 
retary shall not permit an increase in the number of 
operating rooms, procedure rooms, and beds for which 
an applicable hospital is licensed under clause (i) to 
the extent such increase would result in the number 
of operating rooms, procedure rooms, and beds for 
which the applicable hospital is licensed exceeding 200 
percent of the baseline number of operating rooms, 
procedure rooms, and beds of the applicable hospital. 

"(hi) Baseline number of operating rooms, 
procedure rooms, and beds. — In this paragraph, the 
term 'baseline number of operating rooms, procedure 
rooms, and beds' means the number of operating 
rooms, procedure rooms, and beds for which the appli- 
cable hospital is licensed as of the date of enactment 
of this subsection (or, in the case of a hospital that did 
not have a provider agreement in effect as of such date 
but does have such an agreement in effect on Decem- 
ber 31, 2010, the effective date of such provider agree- 
ment). [As revised by section 1106(2)(B) of HCERA] 
"(D) Increase limited to facilities on the main 
campus of the hospital. — Any increase in the number of 
operating rooms, procedure rooms, and beds for which an 
applicable hospital is licensed pursuant to this paragraph 
may only occur in facilities on the main campus of the ap- 
plicable hospital. 

June 9, 2010 



623 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6001 



"(E) Applicable hospital. — In this paragraph, the 
term 'applicable hospital' means a hospital — 

"(i) that is located in a county in which the per- 
centage increase in the population during the most re- 
cent 5-year period (as of the date of the application 
under subparagraph (A)) is at least 150 percent of the 
percentage increase in the population growth of the 
State in which the hospital is located during that pe- 
riod, as estimated by Bureau of the Census; 

"(ii) whose annual percent of total inpatient ad- 
missions that represent inpatient admissions under 
the program under title XIX is equal to or greater 
than the average percent with respect to such admis- 
sions for all hospitals located in the county in which 
the hospital is located; 

"(hi) that does not discriminate against bene- 
ficiaries of Federal health care programs and does not 
permit physicians practicing at the hospital to dis- 
criminate against such beneficiaries; 

"(iv) that is located in a State in which the aver- 
age bed capacity in the State is less than the national 
average bed capacity; and 

"(v) that has an average bed occupancy rate that 
is greater than the average bed occupancy rate in the 
State in which the hospital is located. 
"(F) High medicaid facility described. — [As added 
by section 1106(2)(D) of HCERA\ A high Medicaid facility 
described in this subparagraph is a hospital that — 

"(i) is not the sole hospital in a county; 

"(ii) with respect to each of the 3 most recent 
years for which data are available, has an annual per- 
cent of total inpatient admissions that represent inpa- 
tient admissions under title XIX that is estimated to 
be greater than such percent with respect to such ad- 
missions for any other hospital located in the county 
in which the hospital is located; and 

"(hi) meets the conditions described in subpara- 
graph (E)(iii). 

"(G) Procedure rooms. — In this subsection, the term 
'procedure rooms' includes rooms in which catheteriza- 
tions, angiographies, angiograms, and endoscopies are per- 
formed, except such term shall not include emergency 
rooms or departments (exclusive of rooms in which cath- 
eterizations, angiographies, angiograms, and endoscopies 
are performed). 

"(H) Publication of final decisions. — Not later than 
60 days after receiving a complete application under this 
paragraph, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Reg- 
ister the final decision with respect to such application. 

"(I) Limitation on review. — There shall be no admin- 
istrative or judicial review under section 1869, section 
1878, or otherwise of the process under this paragraph (in- 
cluding the establishment of such process). 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



624 



"(4) Collection of ownership and investment informa- 
tion. — For purposes of subparagraphs (A)(i) and (D)(i) of para- 
graph (1), the Secretary shall collect physician ownership and 
investment information for each hospital. 

"(5) Physician owner or investor defined. — For pur- 
poses of this subsection, the term 'physician owner or investor' 
means a physician (or an immediate family member of such 
physician) with a direct or an indirect ownership or investment 
interest in the hospital. 

"(6) Clarification. — Nothing in this subsection shall be 
construed as preventing the Secretary from revoking a hos- 
pital's provider agreement if not in compliance with regula- 
tions implementing section 1866.". 
(b) Enforcement. — 

(1) Ensuring compliance. — The Secretary of Health and 
Human Services shall establish policies and procedures to en- 
sure compliance with the requirements described in subsection 
(i)(l) of section 1877 of the Social Security Act, as added by 
subsection (a)(3), beginning on the date such requirements first 
apply. Such policies and procedures may include unannounced 
site reviews of hospitals. 

(2) Audits. — Beginning not later than May 1, 2012, the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services shall conduct audits 
to determine if hospitals violate the requirements referred to 
in paragraph (1). [As revised by section 10601(b)~\ 

SEC. 6002. TRANSPARENCY REPORTS AND REPORTING OF PHYSICIAN 
OWNERSHIP OR INVESTMENT INTERESTS. 

Part A of title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301 et 
seq.) is amended by inserting after section 1128F the following new 
section: 

"SEC. 1128G [42 U.S.C. 1320a-7h]. TRANSPARENCY REPORTS AND RE- 
PORTING OF PHYSICIAN OWNERSHIP OR INVESTMENT IN- 
TERESTS. 

"(a) Transparency Reports. — 

"(1) Payments or other transfers of value. — 

"(A) In general. — On March 31, 2013, and on the 
90th day of each calendar year beginning thereafter, any 
applicable manufacturer that provides a payment or other 
transfer of value to a covered recipient (or to an entity or 
individual at the request of or designated on behalf of a 
covered recipient), shall submit to the Secretary, in such 
electronic form as the Secretary shall require, the fol- 
lowing information with respect to the preceding calendar 
year: 

"(i) The name of the covered recipient. 

"(ii) The business address of the covered recipient 
and, in the case of a covered recipient who is a physi- 
cian, the specialty and National Provider Identifier of 
the covered recipient. 

"(hi) The amount of the payment or other transfer 
of value. 

"(iv) The dates on which the payment or other 
transfer of value was provided to the covered recipient. 

June 9, 2010 



625 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6002M128G SSA 



"(v) A description of the form of the payment or 
other transfer of value, indicated (as appropriate for 
all that apply) as — 

"(I) cash or a cash equivalent; 
"(II) in-kind items or services; 
"(III) stock, a stock option, or any other own- 
ership interest, dividend, profit, or other return on 
investment; or 

"(IV) any other form of payment or other 
transfer of value (as defined by the Secretary), 
"(vi) A description of the nature of the payment or 
other transfer of value, indicated (as appropriate for 
all that apply) as — 

"(I) consulting fees; 

"(II) compensation for services other than con- 
sulting; 

"(III) honoraria; 
"(IV) gift; 

"(V) entertainment; 
"(VI) food; 

"(VII) travel (including the specified destina- 
tions); 

"(VIII) education; 

"(IX) research; 

"(X) charitable contribution; 

"(XI) royalty or license; 

"(XII) current or prospective ownership or in- 
vestment interest; 

"(XIII) direct compensation for serving as fac- 
ulty or as a speaker for a medical education pro- 
gram; 

"(XIV) grant; or 

"(XV) any other nature of the payment or 
other transfer of value (as defined by the Sec- 
retary). 

"(vii) If the payment or other transfer of value is 
related to marketing, education, or research specific to 
a covered drug, device, biological, or medical supply, 
the name of that covered drug, device, biological, or 
medical supply. 

"(viii) Any other categories of information regard- 
ing the payment or other transfer of value the Sec- 
retary determines appropriate. 

"(B) Special rule for certain payments or other 
transfers of value. — In the case where an applicable 
manufacturer provides a payment or other transfer of 
value to an entity or individual at the request of or des- 
ignated on behalf of a covered recipient, the applicable 
manufacturer shall disclose that payment or other transfer 
of value under the name of the covered recipient. 
"(2) Physician ownership. — In addition to the require- 
ment under paragraph (1)(A), on March 31, 2013, and on the 
90th day of each calendar year beginning thereafter, any appli- 
cable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organiza- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6002U128G SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



626 



tion shall submit to the Secretary, in such electronic form as 
the Secretary shall require, the following information regard- 
ing any ownership or investment interest (other than an own- 
ership or investment interest in a publicly traded security and 
mutual fund, as described in section 1877(c)) held by a physi- 
cian (or an immediate family member of such physician (as de- 
fined for purposes of section 1877(a))) in the applicable manu- 
facturer or applicable group purchasing organization during 
the preceding year: 

"(A) The dollar amount invested by each physician 
holding such an ownership or investment interest. 

"(B) The value and terms of each such ownership or 
investment interest. 

"(C) Any payment or other transfer of value provided 
to a physician holding such an ownership or investment in- 
terest (or to an entity or individual at the request of or 
designated on behalf of a physician holding such an owner- 
ship or investment interest), including the information de- 
scribed in clauses (i) through (viii) of paragraph (1)(A), ex- 
cept that in applying such clauses, 'physician' shall be sub- 
stituted for 'covered recipient' each place it appears. 

"(D) Any other information regarding the ownership or 
investment interest the Secretary determines appropriate. 
"(b) Penalties for Noncompliance. — 
"(1) Failure to report. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (B) except 
as provided in paragraph (2), any applicable manufacturer 
or applicable group purchasing organization that fails to 
submit information required under subsection (a) in a 
timely manner in accordance with rules or regulations pro- 
mulgated to carry out such subsection, shall be subject to 
a civil money penalty of not less than $1,000, but not more 
than $10,000, for each payment or other transfer of value 
or ownership or investment interest not reported as re- 
quired under such subsection. Such penalty shall be im- 
posed and collected in the same manner as civil money 
penalties under subsection (a) of section 1128A are im- 
posed and collected under that section. 

"(B) Limitation. — The total amount of civil money 
penalties imposed under subparagraph (A) with respect to 
each annual submission of information under subsection 
(a) by an applicable manufacturer or applicable group pur- 
chasing organization shall not exceed $150,000. 
"(2) Knowing failure to report. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (B), any 
applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing 
organization that knowingly fails to submit information re- 
quired under subsection (a) in a timely manner in accord- 
ance with rules or regulations promulgated to carry out 
such subsection, shall be subject to a civil money penalty 
of not less than $10,000, but not more than $100,000, for 
each payment or other transfer of value or ownership or 
investment interest not reported as required under such 
subsection. Such penalty shall be imposed and collected in 

June 9, 2010 



627 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6002M128G SSA 



the same manner as civil money penalties under sub- 
section (a) of section 1128A are imposed and collected 
under that section. 

"(B) Limitation. — The total amount of civil money 
penalties imposed under subparagraph (A) with respect to 
each annual submission of information under subsection 
(a) by an applicable manufacturer or applicable group pur- 
chasing organization shall not exceed $1,000,000. 
"(3) Use of funds. — Funds collected by the Secretary as 
a result of the imposition of a civil money penalty under this 
subsection shall be used to carry out this section. 
"(c) Procedures for Submission of Information and Public 
Availability. — 

"(1) In general. — 

"(A) Establishment. — Not later than October 1, 2011, 
the Secretary shall establish procedures — 

"(i) for applicable manufacturers and applicable 
group purchasing organizations to submit information 
to the Secretary under subsection (a); and 

"(ii) for the Secretary to make such information 
submitted available to the public. 
"(B) Definition of terms. — The procedures estab- 
lished under subparagraph (A) shall provide for the defini- 
tion of terms (other than those terms defined in subsection 
(e)), as appropriate, for purposes of this section. 

"(C) Public availability. — Except as provided in sub- 
paragraph (E), the procedures established under subpara- 
graph (A)(ii) shall ensure that, not later than September 
30, 2013, and on June 30 of each calendar year beginning 
thereafter, the information submitted under subsection (a) 
with respect to the preceding calendar year is made avail- 
able through an Internet website that — 

"(i) is searchable and is in a format that is clear 
and understandable; 

"(ii) contains information that is presented by the 
name of the applicable manufacturer or applicable 
group purchasing organization, the name of the cov- 
ered recipient, the business address of the covered re- 
cipient, the specialty of the covered recipient, the 
value of the payment or other transfer of value, the 
date on which the payment or other transfer of value 
was provided to the covered recipient, the form of the 
payment or other transfer of value, indicated (as ap- 
propriate) under subsection (a)(l)(A)(v), the nature of 
the payment or other transfer of value, indicated (as 
appropriate) under subsection (a)(l)(A)(vi), and the 
name of the covered drug, device, biological, or medical 
supply, as applicable; 

"(hi) contains information that is able to be easily 
aggregated and downloaded; 

"(iv) contains a description of any enforcement ac- 
tions taken to carry out this section, including any 
penalties imposed under subsection (b), during the 
preceding year; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6002U128G SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



628 



"(v) contains background information on industry- 
physician relationships; 

"(vi) in the case of information submitted with re- 
spect to a payment or other transfer of value described 
in subparagraph (E)(i), lists such information sepa- 
rately from the other information submitted under 
subsection (a) and designates such separately listed 
information as funding for clinical research; 

"(vii) contains any other information the Secretary 
determines would be helpful to the average consumer; 

"(viii) does not contain the National Provider Iden- 
tifier of the covered recipient, and 

"(ix) subject to subparagraph (D), provides the ap- 
plicable manufacturer, applicable group purchasing or- 
ganization, or covered recipient an opportunity to re- 
view and submit corrections to the information sub- 
mitted with respect to the applicable manufacturer, 
applicable group purchasing organization, or covered 
recipient, respectively, for a period of not less than 45 
days prior to such information being made available to 
the public. 

"(D) Clarification of time period for review and 
corrections. — In no case may the 45-day period for re- 
view and submission of corrections to information under 
subparagraph (C)(ix) prevent such information from being 
made available to the public in accordance with the dates 
described in the matter preceding clause (i) in subpara- 
graph (C). 

"(E) Delayed publication for payments made pur- 
suant TO PRODUCT RESEARCH OR DEVELOPMENT AGREE- 
MENTS AND CLINICAL INVESTIGATIONS. — 

"(i) In GENERAL. — In the case of information sub- 
mitted under subsection (a) with respect to a payment 
or other transfer of value made to a covered recipient 
by an applicable manufacturer pursuant to a product 
research or development agreement for services fur- 
nished in connection with research on a potential new 
medical technology or a new application of an existing 
medical technology or the development of a new drug, 
device, biological, or medical supply, or by an applica- 
ble manufacturer in connection with a clinical inves- 
tigation regarding a new drug, device, biological, or 
medical supply, the procedures established under sub- 
paragraph (A)(ii) shall provide that such information 
is made available to the public on the first date de- 
scribed in the matter preceding clause (i) in subpara- 
graph (C) after the earlier of the following: 

"(I) The date of the approval or clearance of 

the covered drug, device, biological, or medical 

supply by the Food and Drug Administration. 

"(II) Four calendar years after the date such 

payment or other transfer of value was made. 

"(ii) Confidentiality of information prior to 
publication. — Information described in clause (i) 

June 9, 2010 



629 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6002M128G SSA 



shall be considered confidential and shall not be sub- 
ject to disclosure under section 552 of title 5, United 
States Code, or any other similar Federal, State, or 
local law, until on or after the date on which the infor- 
mation is made available to the public under such 
clause. 

"(2) Consultation. — In establishing the procedures under 
paragraph (1), the Secretary shall consult with the Inspector 
General of the Department of Health and Human Services, af- 
fected industry, consumers, consumer advocates, and other in- 
terested parties in order to ensure that the information made 
available to the public under such paragraph is presented in 
the appropriate overall context. 

"(d) Annual Reports and Relation to State Laws. — 

"(1) Annual report to congress. — Not later than April 
1 of each year beginning with 2013, the Secretary shall submit 
to Congress a report that includes the following: 

"(A) The information submitted under subsection (a) 
during the preceding year, aggregated for each applicable 
manufacturer and applicable group purchasing organiza- 
tion that submitted such information during such year (ex- 
cept, in the case of information submitted with respect to 
a payment or other transfer of value described in sub- 
section (c)(l)(E)(i), such information shall be included in 
the first report submitted to Congress after the date on 
which such information is made available to the public 
under such subsection). 

"(B) A description of any enforcement actions taken to 
carry out this section, including any penalties imposed 
under subsection (b), during the preceding year. 
"(2) Annual reports to states. — Not later than Sep- 
tember 30, 2013 and on June 30 of each calendar year there- 
after, the Secretary shall submit to States a report that in- 
cludes a summary of the information submitted under sub- 
section (a) during the preceding year with respect to covered 
recipients in the State (except, in the case of information sub- 
mitted with respect to a payment or other transfer of value de- 
scribed in subsection (c)(l)(E)(i), such information shall be in- 
cluded in the first report submitted to States after the date on 
which such information is made available to the public under 
such subsection). 

"(3) Relation to state laws. — 

"(A) In general. — In the case of a payment or other 
transfer of value provided by an applicable manufacturer 
that is received by a covered recipient (as defined in sub- 
section (e)) on or after January 1, 2012, subject to subpara- 
graph (B), the provisions of this section shall preempt any 
statute or regulation of a State or of a political subdivision 
of a State that requires an applicable manufacturer (as so 
defined) to disclose or report, in any format, the type of in- 
formation (as described in subsection (a)) regarding such 
payment or other transfer of value. 

"(B) NO PREEMPTION OF ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS. — 

Subparagraph (A) shall not preempt any statute or regula- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6002U128G SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



630 



tion of a State or of a political subdivision of a State that 
requires the disclosure or reporting of information — 

"(i) not of the type required to be disclosed or re- 
ported under this section; 

"(ii) described in subsection (e)(10)(B), except in 
the case of information described in clause (i) of such 
subsection; 

"(hi) by any person or entity other than an appli- 
cable manufacturer (as so defined) or a covered recipi- 
ent (as defined in subsection (e)); or 

"(iv) to a Federal, State, or local governmental 
agency for public health surveillance, investigation, or 
other public health purposes or health oversight pur- 
poses. 

"(C) Nothing in subparagraph (A) shall be construed to 
limit the discovery or admissibility of information de- 
scribed in such subparagraph in a criminal, civil, or ad- 
ministrative proceeding. 

"(4) Consultation. — The Secretary shall consult with the 
Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human 
Services on the implementation of this section. 
"(e) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(1) Applicable group purchasing organization. — The 
term 'applicable group purchasing organization' means a group 
purchasing organization (as defined by the Secretary) that pur- 
chases, arranges for, or negotiates the purchase of a covered 
drug, device, biological, or medical supply which is operating in 
the United States, or in a territory, possession, or common- 
wealth of the United States. 

"(2) Applicable manufacturer. — The term 'applicable 
manufacturer' means a manufacturer of a covered drug, device, 
biological, or medical supply which is operating in the United 
States, or in a territory, possession, or commonwealth of the 
United States. 

"(3) Clinical investigation. — The term 'clinical investiga- 
tion' means any experiment involving 1 or more human sub- 
jects, or materials derived from human subjects, in which a 
drug or device is administered, dispensed, or used. 

"(4) Covered device. — The term 'covered device' means 
any device for which payment is available under title XVIII or 
a State plan under title XIX or XXI (or a waiver of such a 
plan). 

"(5) Covered drug, device, biological, or medical sup- 
ply. — The term 'covered drug, device, biological, or medical 
supply' means any drug, biological product, device, or medical 
supply for which payment is available under title XVIII or a 
State plan under title XIX or XXI (or a waiver of such a plan). 
"(6) Covered recipient. — 

"(A) In general. — Except as provided in subpara- 
graph (B), the term 'covered recipient' means the following: 
"(i) A physician, 
"(ii) A teaching hospital. 
"(B) Exclusion. — Such term does not include a physi- 
cian who is an employee of the applicable manufacturer 

June 9, 2010 



631 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6002M128G SSA 



that is required to submit information under subsection 
(a). 

"(7) Employee. — The term 'employee' has the meaning 
given such term in section 1877(h)(2). 

"(8) Knowingly. — The term 'knowingly' has the meaning 
given such term in section 3729(b) of title 31, United States 
Code. 

"(9) Manufacturer of a covered drug, device, biologi- 
cal, or medical supply. — The term 'manufacturer of a cov- 
ered drug, device, biological, or medical supply' means any en- 
tity which is engaged in the production, preparation, propaga- 
tion, compounding, or conversion of a covered drug, device, bio- 
logical, or medical supply (or any entity under common owner- 
ship with such entity which provides assistance or support to 
such entity with respect to the production, preparation, propa- 
gation, compounding, conversion, marketing, promotion, sale, 
or distribution of a covered drug, device, biological, or medical 
supply). 

"(10) Payment or other transfer of value. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'payment or other trans- 
fer of value' means a transfer of anything of value. Such 
term does not include a transfer of anything of value that 
is made indirectly to a covered recipient through a third 
party in connection with an activity or service in the case 
where the applicable manufacturer is unaware of the iden- 
tity of the covered recipient. 

"(B) Exclusions. — An applicable manufacturer shall 
not be required to submit information under subsection (a) 
with respect to the following: 

"(i) A transfer of anything the value of which is 
less than $10, unless the aggregate amount trans- 
ferred to, requested by, or designated on behalf of the 
covered recipient by the applicable manufacturer dur- 
ing the calendar year exceeds $100. For calendar years 
after 2012, the dollar amounts specified in the pre- 
ceding sentence shall be increased by the same per- 
centage as the percentage increase in the consumer 
price index for all urban consumers (all items; U.S. 
city average) for the 12-month period ending with 
June of the previous year. 

"(ii) Product samples that are not intended to be 
sold and are intended for patient use. 

"(hi) Educational materials that directly benefit 
patients or are intended for patient use. 

"(iv) The loan of a covered device for a short-term 
trial period, not to exceed 90 days, to permit evalua- 
tion of the covered device by the covered recipient. 

"(v) Items or services provided under a contractual 
warranty, including the replacement of a covered de- 
vice, where the terms of the warranty are set forth in 
the purchase or lease agreement for the covered de- 
vice. 

"(vi) A transfer of anything of value to a covered 
recipient when the covered recipient is a patient and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6003 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



632 



not acting in the professional capacity of a covered re- 
cipient. 

"(vii) Discounts (including rebates), 
"(viii) In-kind items used for the provision of char- 
ity care. 

"(ix) A dividend or other profit distribution from, 
or ownership or investment interest in, a publicly 
traded security and mutual fund (as described in sec- 
tion 1877(c)). 

"(x) In the case of an applicable manufacturer who 
offers a self-insured plan, payments for the provision 
of health care to employees under the plan. 

"(xi) In the case of a covered recipient who is a li- 
censed non-medical professional, a transfer of any- 
thing of value to the covered recipient if the transfer 
is payment solely for the non-medical professional 
services of such licensed non-medical professional. 

"(xii) In the case of a covered recipient who is a 
physician, a transfer of anything of value to the cov- 
ered recipient if the transfer is payment solely for the 
services of the covered recipient with respect to a civil 
or criminal action or an administrative proceeding. 
"(11) Physician. — The term 'physician' has the meaning 
given that term in section 1861(r).". 

SEC. 6003. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR IN-OFFICE ANCILLARY 
SERVICES EXCEPTION TO THE PROHIBITION ON PHYSI- 
CIAN SELF-REFERRAL FOR CERTAIN IMAGING SERVICES. 

(a) In General. — Section 1877(b)(2) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395nn(b)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new sentence: "Such requirements shall, with respect to 
magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography, positron emis- 
sion tomography, and any other designated health services speci- 
fied under subsection (h)(6)(D) that the Secretary determines ap- 
propriate, include a requirement that the referring physician in- 
form the individual in writing at the time of the referral that the 
individual may obtain the services for which the individual is being 
referred from a person other than a person described in subpara- 
graph (A)(i) and provide such individual with a written list of sup- 
pliers (as defined in section 1861(d)) who furnish such services in 
the area in which such individual resides.". 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by this section 
shall apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 2010. 

SEC. 6004. PRESCRIPTION DRUG SAMPLE TRANSPARENCY. 

Part A of title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301 et 
seq.), as amended by section 6002, is amended by inserting after 
section 1128G the following new section: 

"SEC. 1128H [42 U.S.C. 1320a-7i]. REPORTING OF INFORMATION RELAT- 
ING TO DRUG SAMPLES. 

"(a) In General. — Not later than April 1 of each year (begin- 
ning with 2012), each manufacturer and authorized distributor of 
record of an applicable drug shall submit to the Secretary (in a 
form and manner specified by the Secretary) the following informa- 
tion with respect to the preceding year: 

June 9, 2010 



633 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6005M150A SSA 



"(1) In the case of a manufacturer or authorized distributor 
of record which makes distributions by mail or common carrier 
under subsection (d)(2) of section 503 of the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 353), the identity and quan- 
tity of drug samples requested and the identity and quantity 
of drug samples distributed under such subsection during that 
year, aggregated by — 

"(A) the name, address, professional designation, and 
signature of the practitioner making the request under 
subparagraph (A)(i) of such subsection, or of any individual 
who makes or signs for the request on behalf of the practi- 
tioner; and 

"(B) any other category of information determined ap- 
propriate by the Secretary. 

"(2) In the case of a manufacturer or authorized distributor 
of record which makes distributions by means other than mail 
or common carrier under subsection (d)(3) of such section 503, 
the identity and quantity of drug samples requested and the 
identity and quantity of drug samples distributed under such 
subsection during that year, aggregated by — 

"(A) the name, address, professional designation, and 
signature of the practitioner making the request under 
subparagraph (A)(i) of such subsection, or of any individual 
who makes or signs for the request on behalf of the practi- 
tioner; and 

"(B) any other category of information determined ap- 
propriate by the Secretary. 

"(b) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(1) Applicable drug. — The term 'applicable drug' means 

a drug — 

"(A) which is subject to subsection (b) of such section 
503; and 

"(B) for which payment is available under title XVIII 
or a State plan under title XLX or XXI (or a waiver of such 
a plan). 

"(2) Authorized distributor of record. — The term 'au- 
thorized distributor of record' has the meaning given that term 
in subsection (e)(3)(A) of such section. 

"(3) Manufacturer. — The term 'manufacturer' has the 
meaning given that term for purposes of subsection (d) of such 
section.". 

SEC. 6005. PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGERS TRANSPARENCY REQUIRE- 
MENTS. 

Part A of title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301 et 
seq.) is amended by inserting after section 1150 the following new 
section: 

"SEC. 1150A [42 U.S.C. 1320b-23]. PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGERS 
TRANSPARENCY REQUIREMENTS. 

"(a) Provision of Information. — A health benefits plan or 
any entity that provides pharmacy benefits management services 
on behalf of a health benefits plan (in this section referred to as 
a 'PBM') that manages prescription drug coverage under a contract 
with — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6005U150A SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



634 



"(1) a PDP sponsor of a prescription drug plan or an MA 
organization offering an MA-PD plan under part D of title 
XVIII; or 

"(2) a qualified health benefits plan offered through an ex- 
change established by a State under section 1311 of the Pa- 
tient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 
shall provide the information described in subsection (b) to the Sec- 
retary and, in the case of a PBM, to the plan with which the PBM 
is under contract with, at such times, and in such form and man- 
ner, as the Secretary shall specify. 

"(b) Information Described. — The information described in 
this subsection is the following with respect to services provided by 
a health benefits plan or PBM for a contract year: 

"(1) The percentage of all prescriptions that were provided 
through retail pharmacies compared to mail order pharmacies, 
and the percentage of prescriptions for which a generic drug 
was available and dispensed (generic dispensing rate), by phar- 
macy type (which includes an independent pharmacy, chain 
pharmacy, supermarket pharmacy, or mass merchandiser 
pharmacy that is licensed as a pharmacy by the State and that 
dispenses medication to the general public), that is paid by the 
health benefits plan or PBM under the contract. 

"(2) The aggregate amount, and the type of rebates, dis- 
counts, or price concessions (excluding bona fide service fees, 
which include but are not limited to distribution service fees, 
inventory management fees, product stocking allowances, and 
fees associated with administrative services agreements and 
patient care programs (such as medication compliance pro- 
grams and patient education programs)) that the PBM nego- 
tiates that are attributable to patient utilization under the 
plan, and the aggregate amount of the rebates, discounts, or 
price concessions that are passed through to the plan sponsor, 
and the total number of prescriptions that were dispensed. 

"(3) The aggregate amount of the difference between the 
amount the health benefits plan pays the PBM and the 
amount that the PBM pays retail pharmacies, and mail order 
pharmacies, and the total number of prescriptions that were 
dispensed. 

"(c) Confidentiality. — Information disclosed by a health bene- 
fits plan or PBM under this section is confidential and shall not be 
disclosed by the Secretary or by a plan receiving the information, 
except that the Secretary may disclose the information in a form 
which does not disclose the identity of a specific PBM, plan, or 
prices charged for drugs, for the following purposes: 

"(1) As the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry 
out this section or part D of title XVIII. 

"(2) To permit the Comptroller General to review the infor- 
mation provided. 

"(3) To permit the Director of the Congressional Budget 
Office to review the information provided. 

"(4) To States to carry out section 1311 of the Patient Pro- 
tection and Affordable Care Act. 

"(d) Penalties. — The provisions of subsection (b)(3)(C) of sec- 
tion 1927 shall apply to a health benefits plan or PBM that fails 

June 9, 2010 



635 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6101 



to provide information required under subsection (a) on a timely 
basis or that knowingly provides false information in the same 
manner as such provisions apply to a manufacturer with an agree- 
ment under that section.". 

Subtitle B — Nursing Home Transparency 
and Improvement 

PART 1— IMPROVING TRANSPARENCY OF 
INFORMATION 

SEC. 6101. REQUIRED DISCLOSURE OF OWNERSHIP AND ADDITIONAL 
DISCLOSABLE PARTIES INFORMATION. 

(a) In General. — Section 1124 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1320a-3) is amended by adding at the end the following 
new subsection: 

"(c) Required Disclosure of Ownership and Additional 

DISCLOSABLE PARTIES INFORMATION. — 

"(1) Disclosure. — A facility shall have the information de- 
scribed in paragraph (2) available — 

"(A) during the period beginning on the date of the en- 
actment of this subsection and ending on the date such in- 
formation is made available to the public under section 
6101(b) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 
for submission to the Secretary, the Inspector General of 
the Department of Health and Human Services, the State 
in which the facility is located, and the State long-term 
care ombudsman in the case where the Secretary, the In- 
spector General, the State, or the State long-term care om- 
budsman requests such information; and 

"(B) beginning on the effective date of the final regula- 
tions promulgated under paragraph (3)(A), for reporting 
such information in accordance with such final regulations. 
Nothing in subparagraph (A) shall be construed as authorizing 
a facility to dispose of or delete information described in such 
subparagraph after the effective date of the final regulations 
promulgated under paragraph (3)(A). 
"(2) Information described. — 

"(A) In general. — The following information is de- 
scribed in this paragraph: 

"(i) The information described in subsections (a) 
and (b), subject to subparagraph (C). 

"(ii) The identity of and information on — 

"(I) each member of the governing body of the 
facility, including the name, title, and period of 
service of each such member; 

"(II) each person or entity who is an officer, 
director, member, partner, trustee, or managing 
employee of the facility, including the name, title, 
and period of service of each such person or entity; 
and 

"(III) each person or entity who is an addi- 
tional disclosable party of the facility. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6101 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



636 



"(iii) The organizational structure of each addi- 
tional disclosable party of the facility and a description 
of the relationship of each such additional disclosable 
party to the facility and to one another. 
"(B) Special rule where information is already 
REPORTED OR SUBMITTED. — To the extent that information 
reported by a facility to the Internal Revenue Service on 
Form 990, information submitted by a facility to the Secu- 
rities and Exchange Commission, or information otherwise 
submitted to the Secretary or any other Federal agency 
contains the information described in clauses (i), (ii), or 
(iii) of subparagraph (A), the facility may provide such 
Form or such information submitted to meet the require- 
ments of paragraph (1). 

"(C) Special rule. — In applying subparagraph (A)(i) — 
"(i) with respect to subsections (a) and (b), 'owner- 
ship or control interest' shall include direct or indirect 
interests, including such interests in intermediate en- 
tities; and 

"(ii) subsection (a)(3)(A)(ii) shall include the owner 
of a whole or part interest in any mortgage, deed of 
trust, note, or other obligation secured, in whole or in 
part, by the entity or any of the property or assets 
thereof, if the interest is equal to or exceeds 5 percent 
of the total property or assets of the entirety. 
"(3) Reporting. — 

"(A) In general. — Not later than the date that is 2 
years after the date of the enactment of this subsection, 
the Secretary shall promulgate final regulations requiring, 
effective on the date that is 90 days after the date on 
which such final regulations are published in the Federal 
Register, a facility to report the information described in 
paragraph (2) to the Secretary in a standardized format, 
and such other regulations as are necessary to carry out 
this subsection. Such final regulations shall ensure that 
the facility certifies, as a condition of participation and 
payment under the program under title XVIII or XIX, that 
the information reported by the facility in accordance with 
such final regulations is, to the best of the facility's knowl- 
edge, accurate and current. 

"(B) Guidance. — The Secretary shall provide guidance 
and technical assistance to States on how to adopt the 
standardized format under subparagraph (A). 

"(4) NO EFFECT ON EXISTING REPORTING REQUIREMENTS. — 
Nothing in this subsection shall reduce, diminish, or alter any 
reporting requirement for a facility that is in effect as of the 
date of the enactment of this subsection. 
"(5) Definitions. — In this subsection: 

"(A) Additional disclosable party. — The term 'addi- 
tional disclosable party' means, with respect to a facility, 
any person or entity who — 

"(i) exercises operational, financial, or managerial 
control over the facility or a part thereof, or provides 
policies or procedures for any of the operations of the 

June 9, 2010 



637 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6101 



facility, or provides financial or cash management 
services to the facility; 

"(ii) leases or subleases real property to the facil- 
ity, or owns a whole or part interest equal to or ex- 
ceeding 5 percent of the total value of such real prop- 
erty; or 

"(hi) provides management or administrative serv- 
ices, management or clinical consulting services, or ac- 
counting or financial services to the facility. 
"(B) Facility. — The term 'facility' means a disclosing 
entity which is — 

"(i) a skilled nursing facility (as defined in section 
1819(a)); or 

"(ii) a nursing facility (as defined in section 
1919(a)). 

"(C) Managing employee. — The term 'managing em- 
ployee' means, with respect to a facility, an individual (in- 
cluding a general manager, business manager, adminis- 
trator, director, or consultant) who directly or indirectly 
manages, advises, or supervises any element of the prac- 
tices, finances, or operations of the facility. 

"(D) Organizational structure. — The term 'organi- 
zational structure' means, in the case of — 

"(i) a corporation, the officers, directors, and 
shareholders of the corporation who have an owner- 
ship interest in the corporation which is equal to or 
exceeds 5 percent; 

"(ii) a limited liability company, the members and 
managers of the limited liability company (including, 
as applicable, what percentage each member and man- 
ager has of the ownership interest in the limited liabil- 
ity company); 

"(hi) a general partnership, the partners of the 
general partnership; 

"(iv) a limited partnership, the general partners 
and any limited partners of the limited partnership 
who have an ownership interest in the limited part- 
nership which is equal to or exceeds 10 percent; 
"(v) a trust, the trustees of the trust; 
"(vi) an individual, contact information for the in- 
dividual; and 

"(vii) any other person or entity, such information 
as the Secretary determines appropriate.". 

(b) Public Availability of Information. — Not later than the 
date that is 1 year after the date on which the final regulations 
promulgated under section 1124(c)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act, 
as added by subsection (a), are published in the Federal Register, 
the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall make the infor- 
mation reported in accordance with such final regulations available 
to the public in accordance with procedures established by the Sec- 
retary. 

(c) Conforming Amendments. — 

(1) In general. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6102 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



638 



(A) Skilled nursing facilities. — Section 1819(d)(1) 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(d)(D) is 
amended by striking subparagraph (B) and redesignating 
subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (B). 

(B) Nursing facilities. — Section 1919(d)(1) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r(d)(D) is amended by 
striking subparagraph (B) and redesignating subparagraph 
(C) as subparagraph (B). 

(2) Effective date. — The amendments made by para- 
graph (1) shall take effect on the date on which the Secretary 
makes the information described in subsection (b)(1) available 
to the public under such subsection. 

SEC. 6102. ACCOUNTABILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR SKILLED NURSING 
FACILITIES AND NURSING FACILITIES. 

Part A of title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301 et 
seq.), as amended by sections 6002 and 6004, is amended by insert- 
ing after section 1128H the following new section: 

"SEC. 11281 [42 U.S.C. 1320a-7j]. ACCOUNTABILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR 
FACILITIES. 

"(a) Definition of Facility. — In this section, the term 'facility' 
means — 

"(1) a skilled nursing facility (as defined in section 
1819(a)); or 

"(2) a nursing facility (as defined in section 1919(a)). 
"(b) Effective Compliance and Ethics Programs. — 

"(1) Requirement. — On or after the date that is 36 
months after the date of the enactment of this section, a facil- 
ity shall, with respect to the entity that operates the facility 
(in this subparagraph referred to as the 'operating organiza- 
tion' or 'organization'), have in operation a compliance and eth- 
ics program that is effective in preventing and detecting crimi- 
nal, civil, and administrative violations under this Act and in 
promoting quality of care consistent with regulations developed 
under paragraph (2). 

"(2) Development of regulations. — 

"(A) In general. — Not later than the date that is 2 
years after such date of the enactment, the Secretary, 
working jointly with the Inspector General of the Depart- 
ment of Health and Human Services, shall promulgate reg- 
ulations for an effective compliance and ethics program for 
operating organizations, which may include a model com- 
pliance program. 

"(B) Design of regulations. — Such regulations with 
respect to specific elements or formality of a program 
shall, in the case of an organization that operates 5 or 
more facilities, vary with the size of the organization, such 
that larger organizations should have a more formal pro- 
gram and include established written policies defining the 
standards and procedures to be followed by its employees. 
Such requirements may specifically apply to the corporate 
level management of multi unit nursing home chains. 

"(C) Evaluation. — Not later than 3 years after the 
date of the promulgation of regulations under this para- 
June 9, 2010 



639 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6102M128I SSA 



graph, the Secretary shall complete an evaluation of the 
compliance and ethics programs required to be established 
under this subsection. Such evaluation shall determine if 
such programs led to changes in deficiency citations, 
changes in quality performance, or changes in other 
metrics of patient quality of care. The Secretary shall sub- 
mit to Congress a report on such evaluation and shall in- 
clude in such report such recommendations regarding 
changes in the requirements for such programs as the Sec- 
retary determines appropriate. 

"(3) Requirements for compliance and ethics pro- 
grams. — In this subsection, the term 'compliance and ethics 
program' means, with respect to a facility, a program of the op- 
erating organization that — 

"(A) has been reasonably designed, implemented, and 
enforced so that it generally will be effective in preventing 
and detecting criminal, civil, and administrative violations 
under this Act and in promoting quality of care; and 

"(B) includes at least the required components speci- 
fied in paragraph (4). 

"(4) Required components of program. — The required 
components of a compliance and ethics program of an oper- 
ating organization are the following: 

"(A) The organization must have established compli- 
ance standards and procedures to be followed by its em- 
ployees and other agents that are reasonably capable of re- 
ducing the prospect of criminal, civil, and administrative 
violations under this Act. 

"(B) Specific individuals within high-level personnel of 
the organization must have been assigned overall responsi- 
bility to oversee compliance with such standards and pro- 
cedures and have sufficient resources and authority to as- 
sure such compliance. 

"(C) The organization must have used due care not to 
delegate substantial discretionary authority to individuals 
whom the organization knew, or should have known 
through the exercise of due diligence, had a propensity to 
engage in criminal, civil, and administrative violations 
under this Act. 

"(D) The organization must have taken steps to com- 
municate effectively its standards and procedures to all 
employees and other agents, such as by requiring partici- 
pation in training programs or by disseminating publica- 
tions that explain in a practical manner what is required. 

"(E) The organization must have taken reasonable 
steps to achieve compliance with its standards, such as by 
utilizing monitoring and auditing systems reasonably de- 
signed to detect criminal, civil, and administrative viola- 
tions under this Act by its employees and other agents and 
by having in place and publicizing a reporting system 
whereby employees and other agents could report viola- 
tions by others within the organization without fear of ret- 
ribution. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6103 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



640 



"(F) The standards must have been consistently en- 
forced through appropriate disciplinary mechanisms, in- 
cluding, as appropriate, discipline of individuals respon- 
sible for the failure to detect an offense. 

"(G) After an offense has been detected, the organiza- 
tion must have taken all reasonable steps to respond ap- 
propriately to the offense and to prevent further similar of- 
fenses, including any necessary modification to its program 
to prevent and detect criminal, civil, and administrative 
violations under this Act. 

"(H) The organization must periodically undertake re- 
assessment of its compliance program to identify changes 
necessary to reflect changes within the organization and 
its facilities. 

"(c) Quality Assurance and Performance Improvement 
Program. — 

"(1) In general. — Not later than December 31, 2011, the 
Secretary shall establish and implement a quality assurance 
and performance improvement program (in this subparagraph 
referred to as the 'QAPI program') for facilities, including multi 
unit chains of facilities. Under the QAPI program, the Sec- 
retary shall establish standards relating to quality assurance 
and performance improvement with respect to facilities and 
provide technical assistance to facilities on the development of 
best practices in order to meet such standards. Not later than 
1 year after the date on which the regulations are promulgated 
under paragraph (2), a facility must submit to the Secretary a 
plan for the facility to meet such standards and implement 
such best practices, including how to coordinate the implemen- 
tation of such plan with quality assessment and assurance ac- 
tivities conducted under sections 1819(b)(1)(B) and 
1919(b)(1)(B), as applicable. 

"(2) Regulations. — The Secretary shall promulgate regu- 
lations to carry out this subsection.". 

SEC. 6103. NURSING HOME COMPARE MEDICARE WEBSITE. 

(a) Skilled Nursing Facilities. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1819 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395i-3) is amended— 

(A) by redesignating subsection (i) as subsection (j); 

and 

(B) by inserting after subsection (h) the following new 
subsection: 

"(i) Nursing Home Compare Website. — 

"(1) Inclusion of additional information. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall ensure that the 
Department of Health and Human Services includes, as 
part of the information provided for comparison of nursing 
homes on the official Internet website of the Federal Gov- 
ernment for Medicare beneficiaries (commonly referred to 
as the 'Nursing Home Compare' Medicare website) (or a 
successor website), the following information in a manner 
that is prominent, updated on a timely basis, easily acces- 

June 9, 2010 



641 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6103 



sible, readily understandable to consumers of long-term 
care services, and searchable: 

"(i) Staffing data for each facility (including resi- 
dent census data and data on the hours of care pro- 
vided per resident per day) based on data submitted 
under section 11281(g), including information on staff- 
ing turnover and tenure, in a format that is clearly 
understandable to consumers of long-term care serv- 
ices and allows such consumers to compare differences 
in staffing between facilities and State and national 
averages for the facilities. Such format shall include — 
"(I) concise explanations of how to interpret 
the data (such as a plain English explanation of 
data reflecting 'nursing home staff hours per resi- 
dent day'); 

"(II) differences in types of staff (such as 
training associated with different categories of 
staff); 

"(III) the relationship between nurse staffing 

levels and quality of care; and 

"(IV) an explanation that appropriate staffing 

levels vary based on patient case mix. 

"(ii) Links to State Internet websites with infor- 
mation regarding State survey and certification pro- 
grams, links to Form 2567 State inspection reports (or 
a successor form) on such websites, information to 
guide consumers in how to interpret and understand 
such reports, and the facility plan of correction or 
other response to such report. Any such links shall be 
posted on a timely basis. 

"(hi) The standardized complaint form developed 
under section 11281(f), including explanatory material 
on what complaint forms are, how they are used, and 
how to file a complaint with the State survey and cer- 
tification program and the State long-term care om- 
budsman program. 

"(iv) Summary information on the number, type, 
severity, and outcome of substantiated complaints. 

"(v) The number of adjudicated instances of crimi- 
nal violations by a facility or the employees of a facil- 
ity— 

"(I) that were committed inside the facility; 
"(II) with respect to such instances of viola- 
tions or crimes committed inside of the facility 
that were the violations or crimes of abuse, ne- 
glect, and exploitation, criminal sexual abuse, or 
other violations or crimes that resulted in serious 
bodily injury; and 

"(III) the number of civil monetary penalties 
levied against the facility, employees, contractors, 
and other agents. 
"(B) Deadline for provision of information. — 

"(i) In general. — Except as provided in clause (ii), 
the Secretary shall ensure that the information de- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6103 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



642 



scribed in subparagraph (A) is included on such 
website (or a successor website) not later than 1 year 
after the date of the enactment of this subsection. 

"(ii) Exception. — The Secretary shall ensure that 
the information described in subparagraph (A)(i) is in- 
cluded on such website (or a successor website) not 
later than the date on which the requirements under 
section 11281(g) are implemented. 

"(2) Review and modification of website. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall establish a 

process — 

"(i) to review the accuracy, clarity of presentation, 
timeliness, and comprehensiveness of information re- 
ported on such website as of the day before the date 
of the enactment of this subsection; and 

"(ii) not later than 1 year after the date of the en- 
actment of this subsection, to modify or revamp such 
website in accordance with the review conducted 
under clause (i). 

"(B) Consultation. — In conducting the review under 
subparagraph (A)(i), the Secretary shall consult with — 

"(i) State long-term care ombudsman programs; 

"(ii) consumer advocacy groups; 

"(hi) provider stakeholder groups; and 

"(iv) any other representatives of programs or 
groups the Secretary determines appropriate.". 

(2) Timeliness of submission of survey and certifi- 
cation INFORMATION. — 

(A) In general. — Section 1819(g)(5) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(g)(5)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new subparagraph: 

"(E) Submission of survey and certification infor- 
mation to the secretary. — In order to improve the time- 
liness of information made available to the public under 
subparagraph (A) and provided on the Nursing Home 
Compare Medicare website under subsection (i), each State 
shall submit information respecting any survey or certifi- 
cation made respecting a skilled nursing facility (including 
any enforcement actions taken by the State) to the Sec- 
retary not later than the date on which the State sends 
such information to the facility. The Secretary shall use 
the information submitted under the preceding sentence to 
update the information provided on the Nursing Home 
Compare Medicare website as expeditiously as practicable 
but not less frequently than quarterly.". 

(B) Effective date. — The amendment made by this 
paragraph shall take effect 1 year after the date of the en- 
actment of this Act. 

(3) Special focus facility program. — Section 1819(f) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(f)) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph: 

"(8) Special focus facility program. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall conduct a spe- 
cial focus facility program for enforcement of requirements 

June 9, 2010 



643 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6103 



for skilled nursing facilities that the Secretary has identi- 
fied as having substantially failed to meet applicable re- 
quirement of this Act. 

"(B) Periodic surveys. — Under such program the Sec- 
retary shall conduct surveys of each facility in the program 
not less than once every 6 months.". 

(b) Nursing Facilities. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1919 of the Social Security Act 

(42 U.S.C. 1396r) is amended— 

(A) by redesignating subsection (i) as subsection (j); 

and 

(B) by inserting after subsection (h) the following new 
subsection: 

"(i) Nursing Home Compare Website. — 

"(1) Inclusion of additional information. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall ensure that the 
Department of Health and Human Services includes, as 
part of the information provided for comparison of nursing 
homes on the official Internet website of the Federal Gov- 
ernment for Medicare beneficiaries (commonly referred to 
as the 'Nursing Home Compare' Medicare website) (or a 
successor website), the following information in a manner 
that is prominent, updated on a timely basis, easily acces- 
sible, readily understandable to consumers of long-term 
care services, and searchable: 

"(i) Staffing data for each facility (including resi- 
dent census data and data on the hours of care pro- 
vided per resident per day) based on data submitted 
under section 11281(g), including information on staff- 
ing turnover and tenure, in a format that is clearly 
understandable to consumers of long-term care serv- 
ices and allows such consumers to compare differences 
in staffing between facilities and State and national 
averages for the facilities. Such format shall include — 
"(I) concise explanations of how to interpret 
the data (such as plain English explanation of 
data reflecting 'nursing home staff hours per resi- 
dent day'); 

"(II) differences in types of staff (such as 
training associated with different categories of 
staff); 

"(HI) the relationship between nurse staffing 

levels and quality of care; and 

"(IV) an explanation that appropriate staffing 

levels vary based on patient case mix. 

"(ii) Links to State Internet websites with infor- 
mation regarding State survey and certification pro- 
grams, links to Form 2567 State inspection reports (or 
a successor form) on such websites, information to 
guide consumers in how to interpret and understand 
such reports, and the facility plan of correction or 
other response to such report. Any such links shall be 
posted on a timely basis. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6103 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



644 



"(iii) The standardized complaint form developed 
under section 11281(f), including explanatory material 
on what complaint forms are, how they are used, and 
how to file a complaint with the State survey and cer- 
tification program and the State long-term care om- 
budsman program. 

"(iv) Summary information on the number, type, 
severity, and outcome of substantiated complaints. 

"(v) The number of adjudicated instances of crimi- 
nal violations by a facility or the employees of a facil- 
ity— 

"(I) that were committed inside of the facility; 

and 

"(II) with respect to such instances of viola- 
tions or crimes committed outside of the facility, 
that were violations or crimes that resulted in the 
serious bodily injury of an elder. 
"(B) Deadline for provision of information. — 

"(i) In general. — Except as provided in clause (ii), 
the Secretary shall ensure that the information de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A) is included on such 
website (or a successor website) not later than 1 year 
after the date of the enactment of this subsection. 

"(ii) Exception. — The Secretary shall ensure that 
the information described in subparagraph (A)(i) is in- 
cluded on such website (or a successor website) not 
later than the date on which the requirements under 
section 11281(g) are implemented. 
"(2) Review and modification of website. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall establish a 
process — 

"(i) to review the accuracy, clarity of presentation, 
timeliness, and comprehensiveness of information re- 
ported on such website as of the day before the date 
of the enactment of this subsection; and 

"(ii) not later than 1 year after the date of the en- 
actment of this subsection, to modify or revamp such 
website in accordance with the review conducted 
under clause (i). 

"(B) Consultation. — In conducting the review under 
subparagraph (A)(i), the Secretary shall consult with — 
"(i) State long-term care ombudsman programs; 
"(ii) consumer advocacy groups; 
"(iii) provider stakeholder groups; 
"(iv) skilled nursing facility employees and their 
representatives; and 

"(v) any other representatives of programs or 
groups the Secretary determines appropriate.". 
(2) Timeliness of submission of survey and certifi- 
cation INFORMATION. — 

(A) In general. — Section 1919(g)(5) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r(g)(5)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new subparagraph: 

June 9, 2010 



645 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6103 



"(E) Submission of survey and certification infor- 
mation to the secretary. — In order to improve the time- 
liness of information made available to the public under 
subparagraph (A) and provided on the Nursing Home 
Compare Medicare website under subsection (i), each State 
shall submit information respecting any survey or certifi- 
cation made respecting a nursing facility (including any 
enforcement actions taken by the State) to the Secretary 
not later than the date on which the State sends such in- 
formation to the facility. The Secretary shall use the infor- 
mation submitted under the preceding sentence to update 
the information provided on the Nursing Home Compare 
Medicare website as expeditiously as practicable but not 
less frequently than quarterly.". 

(B) Effective date. — The amendment made by this 
paragraph shall take effect 1 year after the date of the en- 
actment of this Act. 

(3) Special focus facility program. — Section 1919(f) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r(f)) is amended by add- 
ing at the end of the following new paragraph: 
"(10) Special focus facility program. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall conduct a spe- 
cial focus facility program for enforcement of requirements 
for nursing facilities that the Secretary has identified as 
having substantially failed to meet applicable require- 
ments of this Act. 

"(B) Periodic surveys. — Under such program the Sec- 
retary shall conduct surveys of each facility in the program 
not less often than once every 6 months.", 
(c) Availability of Reports on Surveys, Certifications, 
and Complaint Investigations. — 

(1) Skilled nursing facilities. — Section 1819(d)(1) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(d)(D), as amended by 
section 6101, is amended by adding at the end the following 
new subparagraph: 

"(C) Availability of survey, certification, and 
complaint investigation reports. — A skilled nursing fa- 
cility must — 

"(i) have reports with respect to any surveys, cer- 
tifications, and complaint investigations made respect- 
ing the facility during the 3 preceding years available 
for any individual to review upon request; and 

"(ii) post notice of the availability of such reports 
in areas of the facility that are prominent and acces- 
sible to the public. 
The facility shall not make available under clause (i) iden- 
tifying information about complainants or residents.". 

(2) Nursing facilities. — Section 1919(d)(1) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r(dXD), as amended by section 
6101, is amended by adding at the end the following new sub- 
paragraph: 

"(V) Availability of survey, certification, and 
complaint investigation reports. — A nursing facility 
must — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6103 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



646 



"(i) have reports with respect to any surveys, cer- 
tifications, and complaint investigations made respect- 
ing the facility during the 3 preceding years available 
for any individual to review upon request; and 

"(ii) post notice of the availability of such reports 
in areas of the facility that are prominent and acces- 
sible to the public. 
The facility shall not make available under clause (i) iden- 
tifying information about complainants or residents.". 
(3) Effective date. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section shall take effect 1 year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act. 

(d) Guidance to States on Form 2567 State Inspection Re- 
ports and Complaint Investigation Reports. — 

(1) Guidance. — The Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices (in this subtitle referred to as the "Secretary") shall pro- 
vide guidance to States on how States can establish electronic 
links to Form 2567 State inspection reports (or a successor 
form), complaint investigation reports, and a facility's plan of 
correction or other response to such Form 2567 State inspec- 
tion reports (or a successor form) on the Internet website of the 
State that provides information on skilled nursing facilities 
and nursing facilities and the Secretary shall, if possible, in- 
clude such information on Nursing Home Compare. 

(2) Requirement. — Section 1902(a)(9) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(9)) is amended— 

(A) by striking "and" at the end of subparagraph (B); 

(B) by striking the semicolon at the end of subpara- 
graph (C) and inserting ", and"; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following new subpara- 
graph: 

"(D) that the State maintain a consumer-oriented 
website providing useful information to consumers regard- 
ing all skilled nursing facilities and all nursing facilities in 
the State, including for each facility, Form 2567 State in- 
spection reports (or a successor form), complaint investiga- 
tion reports, the facility's plan of correction, and such 
other information that the State or the Secretary considers 
useful in assisting the public to assess the quality of long 
term care options and the quality of care provided by indi- 
vidual facilities;". 

(3) Definitions. — In this subsection: 

(A) Nursing facility. — The term "nursing facility" 
has the meaning given such term in section 1919(a) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r(a)). 

(B) Secretary. — The term "Secretary" means the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services. 

(C) Skilled nursing facility. — The term "skilled 
nursing facility" has the meaning given such term in sec- 
tion 1819(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i- 
3(a)). 

(e) Development of Consumer Rights Information Page on 
Nursing Home Compare Website. — Not later than 1 year after 
the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall ensure that 

June 9, 2010 



647 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6104 



the Department of Health and Human Services, as part of the in- 
formation provided for comparison of nursing facilities on the Nurs- 
ing Home Compare Medicare website develops and includes a con- 
sumer rights information page that contains links to descriptions 
of, and information with respect to, the following: 

(1) The documentation on nursing facilities that is avail- 
able to the public. 

(2) General information and tips on choosing a nursing fa- 
cility that meets the needs of the individual. 

(3) General information on consumer rights with respect to 
nursing facilities. 

(4) The nursing facility survey process (on a national and 
State-specific basis). 

(5) On a State-specific basis, the services available through 
the State long-term care ombudsman for such State. 

SEC. 6104. REPORTING OF EXPENDITURES. 

Section 1888 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395yy) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: 
"(f) Reporting of Direct Care Expenditures. — 

"(1) In general. — For cost reports submitted under this 
title for cost reporting periods beginning on or after the date 
that is 2 years after the date of the enactment of this sub- 
section, skilled nursing facilities shall separately report ex- 
penditures for wages and benefits for direct care staff (break- 
ing out (at a minimum) registered nurses, licensed professional 
nurses, certified nurse assistants, and other medical and ther- 
apy staff). 

"(2) Modification of form. — The Secretary, in consulta- 
tion with private sector accountants experienced with Medicare 
and Medicaid nursing facility home cost reports, shall redesign 
such reports to meet the requirement of paragraph (1) not later 
than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this subsection. 

"(3) Categorization by functional accounts. — Not later 
than 30 months after the date of the enactment of this sub- 
section, the Secretary, working in consultation with the Medi- 
care Payment Advisory Commission, the Medicaid and CHIP 
Payment and Access Commission, the Inspector General of the 
Department of Health and Human Services, and other expert 
parties the Secretary determines appropriate, shall take the 
expenditures listed on cost reports, as modified under para- 
graph (1), submitted by skilled nursing facilities and categorize 
such expenditures, regardless of any source of payment for 
such expenditures, for each skilled nursing facility into the fol- 
lowing functional accounts on an annual basis: 

"(A) Spending on direct care services (including nurs- 
ing, therapy, and medical services). 

"(B) Spending on indirect care (including housekeeping 
and dietary services). 

"(C) Capital assets (including building and land costs). 
"(D) Administrative services costs. 
"(4) Availability of information submitted. — The Sec- 
retary shall establish procedures to make information on ex- 
penditures submitted under this subsection readily available to 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6105 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



648 



interested parties upon request, subject to such requirements 
as the Secretary may specify under the procedures established 
under this paragraph.". 

SEC. 6105. STANDARDIZED COMPLAINT FORM. 

(a) In General. — Section 11281 of the Social Security Act, as 
added and amended by this Act, is amended by adding at the end 
the following new subsection: 

"(f) Standardized Complaint Form. — 

"(1) Development by the secretary. — The Secretary 
shall develop a standardized complaint form for use by a resi- 
dent (or a person acting on the resident's behalf) in filing a 
complaint with a State survey and certification agency and a 
State long-term care ombudsman program with respect to a fa- 
cility. 

"(2) Complaint forms and resolution processes. — 

"(A) Complaint forms. — The State must make the 
standardized complaint form developed under paragraph 
(1) available upon request to — 

"(i) a resident of a facility; and 
"(ii) any person acting on the resident's behalf. 
"(B) Complaint resolution process. — The State 
must establish a complaint resolution process in order to 
ensure that the legal representative of a resident of a facil- 
ity or other responsible party is not denied access to such 
resident or otherwise retaliated against if they have com- 
plained about the quality of care provided by the facility 
or other issues relating to the facility. Such complaint res- 
olution process shall include — 

"(i) procedures to assure accurate tracking of com- 
plaints received, including notification to the com- 
plainant that a complaint has been received; 

"(ii) procedures to determine the likely severity of 
a complaint and for the investigation of the complaint; 
and 

"(hi) deadlines for responding to a complaint and 
for notifying the complainant of the outcome of the in- 
vestigation. 

"(3) Rule of construction. — Nothing in this subsection 
shall be construed as preventing a resident of a facility (or a 
person acting on the resident's behalf) from submitting a com- 
plaint in a manner or format other than by using the standard- 
ized complaint form developed under paragraph (1) (including 
submitting a complaint orally).". 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by this section 
shall take effect 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act. 

SEC. 6106. ENSURING STAFFING ACCOUNTABILITY. 

Section 11281 of the Social Security Act, as added and amend- 
ed by this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection: 

"(g) Submission of Staffing Information Based on Payroll 
Data in a Uniform Format. — Beginning not later than 2 years 
after the date of the enactment of this subsection, and after con- 
sulting with State long-term care ombudsman programs, consumer 

June 9, 2010 



649 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6111 



advocacy groups, provider stakeholder groups, employees and their 
representatives, and other parties the Secretary deems appropriate, 
the Secretary shall require a facility to electronically submit to the 
Secretary direct care staffing information (including information 
with respect to agency and contract staff) based on payroll and 
other verifiable and auditable data in a uniform format (according 
to specifications established by the Secretary in consultation with 
such programs, groups, and parties). Such specifications shall re- 
quire that the information submitted under the preceding sen- 
tence — 

"(1) specify the category of work a certified employee per- 
forms (such as whether the employee is a registered nurse, li- 
censed practical nurse, licensed vocational nurse, certified 
nursing assistant, therapist, or other medical personnel); 

"(2) include resident census data and information on resi- 
dent case mix; 

"(3) include a regular reporting schedule; and 
"(4) include information on employee turnover and tenure 
and on the hours of care provided by each category of certified 
employees referenced in paragraph (1) per resident per day. 
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as preventing the 
Secretary from requiring submission of such information with re- 
spect to specific categories, such as nursing staff, before other cat- 
egories of certified employees. Information under this subsection 
with respect to agency and contract staff shall be kept separate 
from information on employee staffing.". 

SEC. 6107. GAO STUDY AND REPORT ON FIVE-STAR QUALITY RATING 
SYSTEM. 

(a) Study. — The Comptroller General of the United States (in 
this section referred to as the "Comptroller General") shall conduct 
a study on the Five-Star Quality Rating System for nursing homes 
of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services. Such study shall 
include an analysis of — 

(1) how such system is being implemented; 

(2) any problems associated with such system or its imple- 
mentation; and 

(3) how such system could be improved. 

(b) Report. — Not later than 2 years after the date of enact- 
ment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit to Congress 
a report containing the results of the study conducted under sub- 
section (a), together with recommendations for such legislation and 
administrative action as the Comptroller General determines ap- 
propriate. 

PART 2— TARGETING ENFORCEMENT 

SEC. 6111. CD7IL MONEY PENALTIES. 

(a) Skilled Nursing Facilities. — 

(1) In general.— Section 1819(h)(2)(B)(ii) of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(h)(2)(B)(ii)) is amended— 

(A) by striking "PENALTIES. — The Secretary" and in- 
serting "PENALTIES. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6111 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



650 



"(I) In general. — Subject to subclause (II), 
the Secretary"; and 
(B) by adding at the end the following new subclauses: 
"(II) Reduction of civil money penalties in 
certain circumstances. — Subject to subclause 
(III), in the case where a facility self-reports and 
promptly corrects a deficiency for which a penalty 
was imposed under this clause not later than 10 
calendar days after the date of such imposition, 
the Secretary may reduce the amount of the pen- 
alty imposed by not more than 50 percent. 

"(Ill) Prohibitions on reduction for cer- 
tain deficiencies. — 

"(aa) Repeat deficiencies. — The Sec- 
retary may not reduce the amount of a pen- 
alty under subclause (II) if the Secretary had 
reduced a penalty imposed on the facility in 
the preceding year under such subclause with 
respect to a repeat deficiency. 

"(bb) Certain other deficiencies. — The 
Secretary may not reduce the amount of a 
penalty under subclause (II) if the penalty is 
imposed on the facility for a deficiency that is 
found to result in a pattern of harm or wide- 
spread harm, immediately jeopardizes the 
health or safety of a resident or residents of 
the facility, or results in the death of a resi- 
dent of the facility. 

"(IV) Collection of civil money pen- 
alties. — In the case of a civil money penalty im- 
posed under this clause, the Secretary shall issue 
regulations that — 

"(aa) subject to item (cc), not later than 
30 days after the imposition of the penalty, 
provide for the facility to have the opportunity 
to participate in an independent informal dis- 
pute resolution process which generates a 
written record prior to the collection of such 
penalty; 

"(bb) in the case where the penalty is im- 
posed for each day of noncompliance, provide 
that a penalty may not be imposed for any 
day during the period beginning on the initial 
day of the imposition of the penalty and end- 
ing on the day on which the informal dispute 
resolution process under item (aa) is com- 
pleted; 

"(cc) may provide for the collection of such 
civil money penalty and the placement of such 
amounts collected in an escrow account under 
the direction of the Secretary on the earlier of 
the date on which the informal dispute resolu- 
tion process under item (aa) is completed or 

June 9, 2010 



651 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6111 



the date that is 90 days after the date of the 
imposition of the penalty; 

"(dd) may provide that such amounts col- 
lected are kept in such account pending the 
resolution of any subsequent appeals; 

"(ee) in the case where the facility suc- 
cessfully appeals the penalty, may provide for 
the return of such amounts collected (plus in- 
terest) to the facility; and 

"(ff) in the case where all such appeals 
are unsuccessful, may provide that some por- 
tion of such amounts collected may be used to 
support activities that benefit residents, in- 
cluding assistance to support and protect resi- 
dents of a facility that closes (voluntarily or 
involuntarily) or is decertified (including off- 
setting costs of relocating residents to home 
and community-based settings or another fa- 
cility), projects that support resident and fam- 
ily councils and other consumer involvement 
in assuring quality care in facilities, and facil- 
ity improvement initiatives approved by the 
Secretary (including joint training of facility 
staff and surveyors, technical assistance for 
facilities implementing quality assurance pro- 
grams, the appointment of temporary man- 
agement firms, and other activities approved 
by the Secretary).". 
(2) Conforming amendment. — The second sentence of sec- 
tion 1819(h)(5) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i- 
3(h)(5)) is amended by inserting "(ii)(IV)," after "(i),". 
(b) Nursing Facilities. — 

(1) In general.— Section 1919(h)(3)(C)(ii) of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r(h)(3)(C)) is amended— 

(A) by striking "Penalties. — The Secretary" and in- 
serting "penalties. — 

"(I) In general. — Subject to subclause (II), 
the Secretary"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new subclauses: 

"(II) Reduction of civil money penalties in 
certain circumstances. — Subject to subclause 
(III), in the case where a facility self-reports and 
promptly corrects a deficiency for which a penalty 
was imposed under this clause not later than 10 
calendar days after the date of such imposition, 
the Secretary may reduce the amount of the pen- 
alty imposed by not more than 50 percent. 

"(Ill) Prohibitions on reduction for cer- 
tain deficiencies. — 

"(aa) Repeat deficiencies. — The Sec- 
retary may not reduce the amount of a pen- 
alty under subclause (II) if the Secretary had 
reduced a penalty imposed on the facility in 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6111 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



652 



the preceding year under such subclause with 
respect to a repeat deficiency. 

"(bb) Certain other deficiencies. — The 
Secretary may not reduce the amount of a 
penalty under subclause (II) if the penalty is 
imposed on the facility for a deficiency that is 
found to result in a pattern of harm or wide- 
spread harm, immediately jeopardizes the 
health or safety of a resident or residents of 
the facility, or results in the death of a resi- 
dent of the facility. 

"(IV) Collection of civil money pen- 
alties. — In the case of a civil money penalty im- 
posed under this clause, the Secretary shall issue 
regulations that — 

"(aa) subject to item (cc), not later than 
30 days after the imposition of the penalty, 
provide for the facility to have the opportunity 
to participate in an independent informal dis- 
pute resolution process which generates a 
written record prior to the collection of such 
penalty; 

"(bb) in the case where the penalty is im- 
posed for each day of noncompliance, provide 
that a penalty may not be imposed for any 
day during the period beginning on the initial 
day of the imposition of the penalty and end- 
ing on the day on which the informal dispute 
resolution process under item (aa) is com- 
pleted; 

"(cc) may provide for the collection of such 
civil money penalty and the placement of such 
amounts collected in an escrow account under 
the direction of the Secretary on the earlier of 
the date on which the informal dispute resolu- 
tion process under item (aa) is completed or 
the date that is 90 days after the date of the 
imposition of the penalty; 

"(dd) may provide that such amounts col- 
lected are kept in such account pending the 
resolution of any subsequent appeals; 

"(ee) in the case where the facility suc- 
cessfully appeals the penalty, may provide for 
the return of such amounts collected (plus in- 
terest) to the facility; and 

"(ff) in the case where all such appeals 
are unsuccessful, may provide that some por- 
tion of such amounts collected may be used to 
support activities that benefit residents, in- 
cluding assistance to support and protect resi- 
dents of a facility that closes (voluntarily or 
involuntarily) or is decertified (including off- 
setting costs of relocating residents to home 
and community-based settings or another fa- 
June 9, 2010 



653 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6112 



cility), projects that support resident and fam- 
ily councils and other consumer involvement 
in assuring quality care in facilities, and facil- 
ity improvement initiatives approved by the 
Secretary (including joint training of facility 
staff and surveyors, technical assistance for 
facilities implementing quality assurance pro- 
grams, the appointment of temporary man- 
agement firms, and other activities approved 
by the Secretary).". 
(2) Conforming amendment. — Section 1919(h)(5)(8) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r(h)(5)(8)) is amended by in- 
serting "(h)QV)," after "(i),". 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall take effect 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act. 

SEC. 6112 [42 U.S.C. 1320a-7j note]. NATIONAL INDEPENDENT MONITOR 
DEMONSTRATION PROJECT. 

(a) Establishment. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary, in consultation with the 
Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human 
Services, shall conduct a demonstration project to develop, test, 
and implement an independent monitor program to oversee 
interstate and large intrastate chains of skilled nursing facili- 
ties and nursing facilities. 

(2) Selection. — The Secretary shall select chains of 
skilled nursing facilities and nursing facilities described in 
paragraph (1) to participate in the demonstration project under 
this section from among those chains that submit an applica- 
tion to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and con- 
taining such information as the Secretary may require. 

(3) Duration. — The Secretary shall conduct the dem- 
onstration project under this section for a 2-year period. 

(4) Implementation. — The Secretary shall implement the 
demonstration project under this section not later than 1 year 
after the date of the enactment of this Act. 

(b) Requirements. — The Secretary shall evaluate chains se- 
lected to participate in the demonstration project under this section 
based on criteria selected by the Secretary, including where evi- 
dence suggests that a number of the facilities of the chain are expe- 
riencing serious safety and quality of care problems. Such criteria 
may include the evaluation of a chain that includes a number of 
facilities participating in the "Special Focus Facility" program (or 
a successor program) or multiple facilities with a record of repeated 
serious safety and quality of care deficiencies. 

(c) Responsibilities. — An independent monitor that enters 
into a contract with the Secretary to participate in the conduct of 
the demonstration project under this section shall — 

(1) conduct periodic reviews and prepare root-cause quality 
and deficiency analyses of a chain to assess if facilities of the 
chain are in compliance with State and Federal laws and regu- 
lations applicable to the facilities; 

(2) conduct sustained oversight of the efforts of the chain, 
whether publicly or privately held, to achieve compliance by fa- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6112 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



654 



cilities of the chain with State and Federal laws and regula- 
tions applicable to the facilities; 

(3) analyze the management structure, distribution of ex- 
penditures, and nurse staffing levels of facilities of the chain 
in relation to resident census, staff turnover rates, and tenure; 

(4) report findings and recommendations with respect to 
such reviews, analyses, and oversight to the chain and facili- 
ties of the chain, to the Secretary, and to relevant States; and 

(5) publish the results of such reviews, analyses, and over- 
sight. 

(d) Implementation of Recommendations. — 

(1) Receipt of finding by chain. — Not later than 10 days 
after receipt of a finding of an independent monitor under sub- 
section (c)(4), a chain participating in the demonstration 
project shall submit to the independent monitor a report — 

(A) outlining corrective actions the chain will take to 
implement the recommendations in such report; or 

(B) indicating that the chain will not implement such 
recommendations, and why it will not do so. 

(2) Receipt of report by independent monitor. — Not 
later than 10 days after receipt of a report submitted by a 
chain under paragraph (1), an independent monitor shall final- 
ize its recommendations and submit a report to the chain and 
facilities of the chain, the Secretary, and the State or States, 
as appropriate, containing such final recommendations. 

(e) Cost of Appointment. — A chain shall be responsible for a 
portion of the costs associated with the appointment of independent 
monitors under the demonstration project under this section. The 
chain shall pay such portion to the Secretary (in an amount and 
in accordance with procedures established by the Secretary). 

(f) Waiver Authority. — The Secretary may waive such re- 
quirements of titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395 et seq.; 1396 et seq.) as may be necessary for the pur- 
pose of carrying out the demonstration project under this section. 

(g) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are authorized 
to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this 
section. 

(h) Definitions. — In this section: 

(1) Additional disclosable party. — The term "additional 
disclosable party" has the meaning given such term in section 
1124(c)(5)(A) of the Social Security Act, as added by section 
4201(a). 

(2) Facility. — The term "facility" means a skilled nursing 
facility or a nursing facility. 

(3) Nursing facility. — The term "nursing facility" has the 
meaning given such term in section 1919(a) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r(a)). 

(4) Secretary. — The term "Secretary" means the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services, acting through the As- 
sistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. 

(5) Skilled nursing facility. — The term "skilled nursing 
facility" has the meaning given such term in section 1819(a) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395(a)). 

(i) Evaluation and Report. — 

June 9, 2010 



655 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6113 



(1) Evaluation. — The Secretary, in consultation with the 
Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human 
Services, shall evaluate the demonstration project conducted 
under this section. 

(2) Report. — Not later than 180 days after the completion 
of the demonstration project under this section, the Secretary 
shall submit to Congress a report containing the results of the 
evaluation conducted under paragraph (1), together with rec- 
ommendations — 

(A) as to whether the independent monitor program 
should be established on a permanent basis; 

(B) if the Secretary recommends that such program be 
so established, on appropriate procedures and mechanisms 
for such establishment; and 

(C) for such legislation and administrative action as 
the Secretary determines appropriate. 

SEC. 6113. NOTIFICATION OF FACILITY CLOSURE. 

(a) In General. — Section 11281 of the Social Security Act, as 
added and amended by this Act, is amended by adding at the end 
the following new subsection: 

"(h) Notification of Facility Closure. — 

"(1) In general. — Any individual who is the administrator 
of a facility must — 

"(A) submit to the Secretary, the State long-term care 
ombudsman, residents of the facility, and the legal rep- 
resentatives of such residents or other responsible parties, 
written notification of an impending closure — 

"(i) subject to clause (ii), not later than the date 
that is 60 days prior to the date of such closure; and 
"(ii) in the case of a facility where the Secretary 
terminates the facility's participation under this title, 
not later than the date that the Secretary determines 
appropriate; 

"(B) ensure that the facility does not admit any new 
residents on or after the date on which such written notifi- 
cation is submitted; and 

"(C) include in the notice a plan for the transfer and 
adequate relocation of the residents of the facility by a 
specified date prior to closure that has been approved by 
the State, including assurances that the residents will be 
transferred to the most appropriate facility or other setting 
in terms of quality, services, and location, taking into con- 
sideration the needs, choice, and best interests of each 
resident. 

"(2) Relocation. — 

"(A) In general. — The State shall ensure that, before 
a facility closes, all residents of the facility have been suc- 
cessfully relocated to another facility or an alternative 
home and community-based setting. 

"(B) Continuation of payments until residents re- 
located. — The Secretary may, as the Secretary deter- 
mines appropriate, continue to make payments under this 
title with respect to residents of a facility that has sub- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6114 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



656 



mitted a notification under paragraph (1) during the pe- 
riod beginning on the date such notification is submitted 
and ending on the date on which the resident is success- 
fully relocated. 

"(3) Sanctions. — Any individual who is the administrator 
of a facility that fails to comply with the requirements of para- 
graph (1) — 

"(A) shall be subject to a civil monetary penalty of up 
to $100,000; 

"(B) may be subject to exclusion from participation in 
any Federal health care program (as defined in section 
1128B(f)); and 

"(C) shall be subject to any other penalties that may 
be prescribed by law. 

"(4) Procedure. — The provisions of section 1128A (other 
than subsections (a) and (b) and the second sentence of sub- 
section (f)) shall apply to a civil money penalty or exclusion 
under paragraph (3) in the same manner as such provisions 
apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a).". 

(b) Conforming Amendments. — Section 1819(h)(4) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(h)(4)) is amended— 

(1) in the first sentence, by striking "the Secretary shall 
terminate" and inserting "the Secretary, subject to section 
11281(h), shall terminate"; and 

(2) in the second sentence, by striking "subsection (c)(2)" 
and inserting "subsection (c)(2) and section 11281(h)". 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall take effect 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act. 

SEC. 6114 [42 U.S.C. 1395i-3 note]. NATIONAL DEMONSTRATION 
PROJECTS ON CULTURE CHANGE AND USE OF INFORMA- 
TION TECHNOLOGY IN NURSING HOMES. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary shall conduct 2 demonstration 
projects, 1 for the development of best practices in skilled nursing 
facilities and nursing facilities that are involved in the culture 
change movement (including the development of resources for fa- 
cilities to find and access funding in order to undertake culture 
change) and 1 for the development of best practices in skilled nurs- 
ing facilities and nursing facilities for the use of information tech- 
nology to improve resident care. 

(b) Conduct of Demonstration Projects. — 

(1) Grant award. — Under each demonstration project con- 
ducted under this section, the Secretary shall award 1 or more 
grants to facility-based settings for the development of best 
practices described in subsection (a) with respect to the dem- 
onstration project involved. Such award shall be made on a 
competitive basis and may be allocated in 1 lump-sum pay- 
ment. 

(2) Consideration of special needs of residents. — 
Each demonstration project conducted under this section shall 
take into consideration the special needs of residents of skilled 
nursing facilities and nursing facilities who have cognitive im- 
pairment, including dementia. 

(c) Duration and Implementation. — 

June 9, 2010 



657 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6121 



(1) Duration. — The demonstration projects shall each be 
conducted for a period not to exceed 3 years. 

(2) Implementation. — The demonstration projects shall 
each be implemented not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act. 

(d) Definitions. — In this section: 

(1) Nursing facility. — The term "nursing facility" has the 
meaning given such term in section 1919(a) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r(a)). 

(2) Secretary. — The term "Secretary" means the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services. 

(3) Skilled nursing facility. — The term "skilled nursing 
facility" has the meaning given such term in section 1819(a) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395(a)). 

(e) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are authorized 
to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this 
section. 

(f) Report. — Not later than 9 months after the completion of 
the demonstration project, the Secretary shall submit to Congress 
a report on such project, together with recommendations for such 
legislation and administrative action as the Secretary determines 
appropriate. 

PART 3— IMPROVING STAFF TRAINING 

SEC. 6121. DEMENTIA AND ABUSE PREVENTION TRAINING. 

(a) Skilled Nursing Facilities. — 

(1) In general.— Section 1819(f)(2)(A)(i)(I) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(f)(2)(A)(i)(I)) is amended by in- 
serting "(including, in the case of initial training and, if the 
Secretary determines appropriate, in the case of ongoing train- 
ing, dementia management training, and patient abuse preven- 
tion training" before ", (II)". 

(2) Clarification of definition of nurse aide. — Section 
1819(b)(5)(F) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i- 
3(b)(5)(F)) is amended by adding at the end the following flush 
sentence: 

"Such term includes an individual who provides such serv- 
ices through an agency or under a contract with the facil- 
ity.". 

(b) Nursing Facilities. — 

(1) In general.— Section 1919(f)(2)(A)(i)(I) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r(f)(2)(A)(i)(I)) is amended by in- 
serting "(including, in the case of initial training and, if the 
Secretary determines appropriate, in the case of ongoing train- 
ing, dementia management training, and patient abuse preven- 
tion training" before ", (II)". 

(2) Clarification of definition of nurse aide. — Section 
1919(b)(5)(F) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396r(b)(5)(F)) is amended by adding at the end the following 
flush sentence: 

"Such term includes an individual who provides such serv- 
ices through an agency or under a contract with the facil- 
ity.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6201 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



658 



(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall take effect 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act. 

Subtitle C — Nationwide Program for Na- 
tional and State Background Checks on 
Direct Patient Access Employees of 
Long-term Care Facilities and Providers 

SEC. 6201 [42 U.S.C. 1320a-71]. NATIONWIDE PROGRAM FOR NATIONAL 
AND STATE BACKGROUND CHECKS ON DIRECT PATIENT 
ACCESS EMPLOYEES OF LONG-TERM CARE FACILITIES 
AND PROVIDERS. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices (in this section referred to as the "Secretary"), shall establish 
a program to identify efficient, effective, and economical procedures 
for long term care facilities or providers to conduct background 
checks on prospective direct patient access employees on a nation- 
wide basis (in this subsection, such program shall be referred to as 
the "nationwide program"). Except for the following modifications, 
the Secretary shall carry out the nationwide program under similar 
terms and conditions as the pilot program under section 307 of the 
Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act 
of 2003 (Public Law 108-173; 117 Stat. 2257), including the prohi- 
bition on hiring abusive workers and the authorization of the impo- 
sition of penalties by a participating State under subsection 
(b)(3)(A) and (b)(6), respectively, of such section 307: 
(1) Agreements. — 

(A) Newly participating states. — The Secretary 
shall enter into agreements with each State — 

(i) that the Secretary has not entered into an 
agreement with under subsection (c)(1) of such section 
307; 

(ii) that agrees to conduct background checks 
under the nationwide program on a Statewide basis; 
and 

(iii) that submits an application to the Secretary 
containing such information and at such time as the 
Secretary may specify. 

(B) Certain previously participating states. — The 
Secretary shall enter into agreements with each State — 

(i) that the Secretary has entered into an agree- 
ment with under such subsection (c)(1), but only in the 
case where such agreement did not require the State 
to conduct background checks under the program es- 
tablished under subsection (a) of such section 307 on 
a Statewide basis; 

(ii) that agrees to conduct background checks 
under the nationwide program on a Statewide basis; 
and 

(iii) that submits an application to the Secretary 
containing such information and at such time as the 
Secretary may specify. 

June 9, 2010 



659 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6201 



(2) Nonapplication OF selection criteria. — The selec- 
tion criteria required under subsection (c)(3)(B) of such section 
307 shall not apply. 

(3) Required fingerprint check as part of criminal 
history background check. — The procedures established 
under subsection (b)(1) of such section 307 shall — 

(A) require that the long-term care facility or provider 
(or the designated agent of the long-term care facility or 
provider) obtain State and national criminal history back- 
ground checks on the prospective employee through such 
means as the Secretary determines appropriate, efficient, 
and effective that utilize a search of State-based abuse and 
neglect registries and databases, including the abuse and 
neglect registries of another State in the case where a pro- 
spective employee previously resided in that State, State 
criminal history records, the records of any proceedings in 
the State that may contain disqualifying information about 
prospective employees (such as proceedings conducted by 
State professional licensing and disciplinary boards and 
State Medicaid Fraud Control Units), and Federal criminal 
history records, including a fingerprint check using the In- 
tegrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System of 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation; 

(B) require States to describe and test methods that 
reduce duplicative fingerprinting, including providing for 
the development of "rap back" capability by the State such 
that, if a direct patient access employee of a long-term care 
facility or provider is convicted of a crime following the ini- 
tial criminal history background check conducted with re- 
spect to such employee, and the employee's fingerprints 
match the prints on file with the State law enforcement 
department, the department will immediately inform the 
State and the State will immediately inform the long-term 
care facility or provider which employs the direct patient 
access employee of such conviction; and 

(C) require that criminal history background checks 
conducted under the nationwide program remain valid for 
a period of time specified by the Secretary. 

(4) State requirements. — An agreement entered into 
under paragraph (1) shall require that a participating State — 

(A) be responsible for monitoring compliance with the 
requirements of the nationwide program; 

(B) have procedures in place to — 

(i) conduct screening and criminal history back- 
ground checks under the nationwide program in ac- 
cordance with the requirements of this section; 

(ii) monitor compliance by long-term care facilities 
and providers with the procedures and requirements 
of the nationwide program; 

(hi) as appropriate, provide for a provisional pe- 
riod of employment by a long-term care facility or pro- 
vider of a direct patient access employee, not to exceed 
60 days, pending completion of the required criminal 
history background check and, in the case where the 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6201 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



660 



employee has appealed the results of such background 
check, pending completion of the appeals process, dur- 
ing which the employee shall be subject to direct on- 
site supervision (in accordance with procedures estab- 
lished by the State to ensure that a long-term care fa- 
cility or provider furnishes such direct on-site super- 
vision); 

(iv) provide an independent process by which a 
provisional employee or an employee may appeal or 
dispute the accuracy of the information obtained in a 
background check performed under the nationwide 
program, including the specification of criteria for ap- 
peals for direct patient access employees found to have 
disqualifying information which shall include consider- 
ation of the passage of time, extenuating cir- 
cumstances, demonstration of rehabilitation, and rel- 
evancy of the particular disqualifying information with 
respect to the current employment of the individual; 

(v) provide for the designation of a single State 
agency as responsible for — 

(I) overseeing the coordination of any State 
and national criminal history background checks 
requested by a long-term care facility or provider 
(or the designated agent of the long-term care fa- 
cility or provider) utilizing a search of State and 
Federal criminal history records, including a fin- 
gerprint check of such records; 

(II) overseeing the design of appropriate pri- 
vacy and security safeguards for use in the review 
of the results of any State or national criminal 
history background checks conducted regarding a 
prospective direct patient access employee to de- 
termine whether the employee has any conviction 
for a relevant crime; 

(III) immediately reporting to the long-term 
care facility or provider that requested the crimi- 
nal history background check the results of such 
review; and 

(IV) in the case of an employee with a convic- 
tion for a relevant crime that is subject to report- 
ing under section 1128E of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1320a-7e), reporting the existence of 
such conviction to the database established under 
that section; 

(vi) determine which individuals are direct patient 
access employees (as defined in paragraph (6)(B)) for 
purposes of the nationwide program; 

(vii) as appropriate, specify offenses, including 
convictions for violent crimes, for purposes of the na- 
tionwide program; and 

(viii) describe and test methods that reduce dupli- 
cative fingerprinting, including providing for the de- 
velopment of "rap back" capability such that, if a di- 
rect patient access employee of a long-term care facil- 

June 9, 2010 



661 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6201 



ity or provider is convicted of a crime following the ini- 
tial criminal history background check conducted with 
respect to such employee, and the employee's finger- 
prints match the prints on file with the State law en- 
forcement department — 

(I) the department will immediately inform 
the State agency designated under clause (v) and 
such agency will immediately inform the facility 
or provider which employs the direct patient ac- 
cess employee of such conviction; and 

(II) the State will provide, or will require the 
facility to provide, to the employee a copy of the 
results of the criminal history background check 
conducted with respect to the employee at no 
charge in the case where the individual requests 
such a copy. 

(5) Payments. — 

(A) Newly participating states. — 

(i) In general. — As part of the application sub- 
mitted by a State under paragraph (l)(A)(iii), the 
State shall guarantee, with respect to the costs to be 
incurred by the State in carrying out the nationwide 
program, that the State will make available (directly 
or through donations from public or private entities) a 
particular amount of non-Federal contributions, as a 
condition of receiving the Federal match under clause 
(ii). 

(ii) Federal match. — The payment amount to 
each State that the Secretary enters into an agree- 
ment with under paragraph (1)(A) shall be 3 times the 
amount that the State guarantees to make available 
under clause (i), except that in no case may the pay- 
ment amount exceed $3,000,000. 

(B) Previously participating states. — 

(i) In general. — As part of the application sub- 
mitted by a State under paragraph (l)(B)(iii), the 
State shall guarantee, with respect to the costs to be 
incurred by the State in carrying out the nationwide 
program, that the State will make available (directly 
or through donations from public or private entities) a 
particular amount of non-Federal contributions, as a 
condition of receiving the Federal match under clause 
(ii). 

(ii) Federal match. — The payment amount to 
each State that the Secretary enters into an agree- 
ment with under paragraph (1)(B) shall be 3 times the 
amount that the State guarantees to make available 
under clause (i), except that in no case may the pay- 
ment amount exceed $1,500,000. 

(6) Definitions. — Under the nationwide program: 

(A) Conviction for a relevant crime. — The term 
"conviction for a relevant crime" means any Federal or 
State criminal conviction for — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6201 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



662 



(i) any offense described in section 1128(a) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7); or 

(ii) such other types of offenses as a participating 
State may specify for purposes of conducting the pro- 
gram in such State. 

(B) Disqualifying information. — The term "disquali- 
fying information" means a conviction for a relevant crime 
or a finding of patient or resident abuse. 

(C) Finding of patient or resident abuse. — The 
term "finding of patient or resident abuse" means any sub- 
stantiated finding by a State agency under section 
1819(g)(1)(C) or 1919(g)(1)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395i-3(g)(l)(C), 1396r(g)(l)(C)) or a Federal agency 
that a direct patient access employee has committed — 

(i) an act of patient or resident abuse or neglect 
or a misappropriation of patient or resident property; 
or 

(ii) such other types of acts as a participating 
State may specify for purposes of conducting the pro- 
gram in such State. 

(D) Direct patient access employee. — The term "di- 
rect patient access employee" means any individual who 
has access to a patient or resident of a long-term care facil- 
ity or provider through employment or through a contract 
with such facility or provider and has duties that involve 
(or may involve) one-on-one contact with a patient or resi- 
dent of the facility or provider, as determined by the State 
for purposes of the nationwide program. Such term does 
not include a volunteer unless the volunteer has duties 
that are equivalent to the duties of a direct patient access 
employee and those duties involve (or may involve) one-on- 
one contact with a patient or resident of the long-term care 
facility or provider. 

(E) Long-term care facility or provider. — The 
term "long-term care facility or provider" means the fol- 
lowing facilities or providers which receive payment for 
services under title XVIII or XIX of the Social Security 
Act: 

(i) A skilled nursing facility (as defined in section 
1819(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i- 

3(a))). 

(ii) A nursing facility (as defined in section 
1919(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r(a))). 

(iii) A home health agency. 

(iv) A provider of hospice care (as defined in sec- 
tion 1861(dd)(l) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(dd)(l))). 

(v) A long-term care hospital (as described in sec- 
tion 1886(dXD(B)(iv) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395ww(d)(l)(B)(iv))). 

(vi) A provider of personal care services. 

(vii) A provider of adult day care. 

(viii) A residential care provider that arranges for, 
or directly provides, long-term care services, including 

June 9, 2010 



663 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6201 



an assisted living facility that provides a level of care 
established by the Secretary. 

(ix) An intermediate care facility for the mentally 
retarded (as defined in section 1905(d) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396d(d))). 

(x) Any other facility or provider of long-term care 
services under such titles as the participating State 
determines appropriate. 

(7) Evaluation and report. — 

(A) Evaluation. — 

(i) In general. — The Inspector General of the De- 
partment of Health and Human Services shall conduct 
an evaluation of the nationwide program. 

(ii) Inclusion of specific topics. — The evalua- 
tion conducted under clause (i) shall include the fol- 
lowing: 

(I) A review of the various procedures imple- 
mented by participating States for long-term care 
facilities or providers, including staffing agencies, 
to conduct background checks of direct patient ac- 
cess employees under the nationwide program and 
identification of the most appropriate, efficient, 
and effective procedures for conducting such back- 
ground checks. 

(II) An assessment of the costs of conducting 
such background checks (including start up and 
administrative costs). 

(III) A determination of the extent to which 
conducting such background checks leads to any 
unintended consequences, including a reduction in 
the available workforce for long-term care facili- 
ties or providers. 

(IV) An assessment of the impact of the na- 
tionwide program on reducing the number of inci- 
dents of neglect, abuse, and misappropriation of 
resident property to the extent practicable. 

(V) An evaluation of other aspects of the na- 
tionwide program, as determined appropriate by 
the Secretary. 

(B) Report. — Not later than 180 days after the com- 
pletion of the nationwide program, the Inspector General 
of the Department of Health and Human Services shall 
submit a report to Congress containing the results of the 
evaluation conducted under subparagraph (A). 

(b) Funding. — 

(1) Notification. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services shall notify the Secretary of the Treasury of the 
amount necessary to carry out the nationwide program under 
this section for the period of fiscal years 2010 through 2012, 
except that in no case shall such amount exceed $160,000,000. 

(2) Transfer of funds. — 

(A) In general. — Out of any funds in the Treasury 
not otherwise appropriated, the Secretary of the Treasury 
shall provide for the transfer to the Secretary of Health 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6301 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



664 



and Human Services of the amount specified as necessary 
to carry out the nationwide program under paragraph (1). 
Such amount shall remain available until expended. 

(B) Reservation of funds for conduct of evalua- 
tion. — The Secretary may reserve not more than 
$3,000,000 of the amount transferred under subparagraph 
(A) to provide for the conduct of the evaluation under sub- 
section (a)(7)(A). 

Subtitle D — Patient-Centered Outcomes 

Research 

SEC. 6301. PATIENT-CENTERED OUTCOMES RESEARCH. 

(a) In General.— Title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1301 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
part: 

"Part D — Comparative Clinical Effectiveness Research 

"comparative clinical effectiveness research 

"Sec. 1181 [42 U.S.C. 1320e]. (a) Definitions.— In this sec- 
tion: 

"(1) Board. — The term 'Board' means the Board of Gov- 
ernors established under subsection (f). 

"(2) Comparative clinical effectiveness research; re- 
search. — 

"(A) In general. — The terms 'comparative clinical ef- 
fectiveness research' and 'research' mean research evalu- 
ating and comparing health outcomes and the clinical ef- 
fectiveness, risks, and benefits of 2 or more medical treat- 
ments, services, and items described in subparagraph (B). 

"(B) Medical treatments, services, and items de- 
scribed. — The medical treatments, services, and items de- 
scribed in this subparagraph are health care interventions, 
protocols for treatment, care management, and delivery, 
procedures, medical devices, diagnostic tools, pharma- 
ceuticals (including drugs and biologicals), integrative 
health practices, and any other strategies or items being 
used in the treatment, management, and diagnosis of, or 
prevention of illness or injury in, individuals. 
"(3) Conflict of interest. — The term 'conflict of interest' 
means an association, including a financial or personal associa- 
tion, that have the potential to bias or have the appearance of 
biasing an individual's decisions in matters related to the In- 
stitute or the conduct of activities under this section. 

"(4) Real conflict of interest. — The term 'real conflict 
of interest' means any instance where a member of the Board, 
the methodology committee established under subsection (d)(6), 
or an advisory panel appointed under subsection (d)(4), or a 
close relative of such member, has received or could receive ei- 
ther of the following: 

June 9, 2010 



665 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6301X1181 SSA 



"(A) A direct financial benefit of any amount deriving 
from the result or findings of a study conducted under this 
section. 

"(B) A financial benefit from individuals or companies 
that own or manufacture medical treatments, services, or 
items to be studied under this section that in the aggre- 
gate exceeds $10,000 per year. For purposes of the pre- 
ceding sentence, a financial benefit includes honoraria, 
fees, stock, or other financial benefit and the current value 
of the member or close relative's already existing stock 
holdings, in addition to any direct financial benefit deriv- 
ing from the results or findings of a study conducted under 
this section. 

"(b) Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute. — 

"(1) Establishment. — There is authorized to be estab- 
lished a nonprofit corporation, to be known as the 'Patient- 
Centered Outcomes Research Institute' (referred to in this sec- 
tion as the 'Institute') which is neither an agency nor establish- 
ment of the United States Government. 

"(2) Application of provisions. — The Institute shall be 
subject to the provisions of this section, and, to the extent con- 
sistent with this section, to the District of Columbia Nonprofit 
Corporation Act. 

"(3) Funding of comparative clinical effectiveness 
research. — For fiscal year 2010 and each subsequent fiscal 
year, amounts in the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research 
Trust Fund (referred to in this section as the 'PCORTF') under 
section 9511 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be 
available, without further appropriation, to the Institute to 
carry out this section. 

"(c) Purpose. — The purpose of the Institute is to assist pa- 
tients, clinicians, purchasers, and policy-makers in making in- 
formed health decisions by advancing the quality and relevance of 
evidence concerning the manner in which diseases, disorders, and 
other health conditions can effectively and appropriately be pre- 
vented, diagnosed, treated, monitored, and managed through re- 
search and evidence synthesis that considers variations in patient 
subpopulations, and the dissemination of research findings with re- 
spect to the relative health outcomes, clinical effectiveness, and ap- 
propriateness of the medical treatments, services, and items de- 
scribed in subsection (a)(2)(B). 

"(d) Duties.— 

"(1) Identifying research priorities and establishing 
research project agenda. — 

"(A) Identifying research priorities. — The Institute 
shall identify national priorities for research, taking into 
account factors of disease incidence, prevalence, and bur- 
den in the United States (with emphasis on chronic condi- 
tions), gaps in evidence in terms of clinical outcomes, prac- 
tice variations and health disparities in terms of delivery 
and outcomes of care, the potential for new evidence to im- 
prove patient health, well-being, and the quality of care, 
the effect on national expenditures associated with a 
health care treatment, strategy, or health conditions, as 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6301U181 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



666 



well as patient needs, outcomes, and preferences, the rel- 
evance to patients and clinicians in making informed 
health decisions, and priorities in the National Strategy 
for quality care established under section 399H of the Pub- 
lic Health Service Act that are consistent with this section. 

"(B) Establishing research project agenda. — The 
Institute shall establish and update a research project 
agenda for research to address the priorities identified 
under subparagraph (A), taking into consideration the 
types of research that might address each priority and the 
relative value (determined based on the cost of conducting 
research compared to the potential usefulness of the infor- 
mation produced by research) associated with the different 
types of research, and such other factors as the Institute 
determines appropriate. 

"(2) Carrying out research project agenda. — 

"(A) Research. — The Institute shall carry out the re- 
search project agenda established under paragraph (1)(B) 
in accordance with the methodological standards adopted 
under paragraph (9) using methods, including the fol- 
lowing: 

"(i) Systematic reviews and assessments of exist- 
ing and future research and evidence including origi- 
nal research conducted subsequent to the date of the 
enactment of this section. 

"(ii) Primary research, such as randomized clinical 
trials, molecularly informed trials, and observational 
studies. 

"(hi) Any other methodologies recommended by 
the methodology committee established under para- 
graph (6) that are adopted by the Board under para- 
graph (9). 

"(B) Contracts for the management of funding 
and conduct of research. — 
"(i) Contracts — 

"(I) In general. — In accordance with the re- 
search project agenda established under para- 
graph (1)(B), the Institute shall enter into con- 
tracts for the management of funding and conduct 
of research in accordance with the following: 

"(aa) Appropriate agencies and instru- 
mentalities of the Federal Government. 

"(bb) Appropriate academic research, pri- 
vate sector research, or study-conducting enti- 
ties. 

"(II) Preference. — In entering into contracts 
under subclause (I), the Institute shall give pref- 
erence to the Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality and the National Institutes of Health, but 
only if the research to be conducted or managed 
under such contract is authorized by the gov- 
erning statutes of such Agency or Institutes. 

June 9, 2010 



667 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6301U181 SSA 



"(ii) Conditions for contracts. — A contract en- 
tered into under this subparagraph shall require that 
the agency, instrumentality, or other entity — 

"(I) abide by the transparency and conflicts of 
interest requirements under subsection (h) that 
apply to the Institute with respect to the research 
managed or conducted under such contract; 

"(II) comply with the methodological stand- 
ards adopted under paragraph (9) with respect to 
such research; 

"(III) consult with the expert advisory panels 
for clinical trials and rare disease appointed under 
clauses (ii) and (hi), respectively, of paragraph 
(4)(A); 

"(IV) subject to clause (iv), permit a re- 
searcher who conducts original research, as de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A)(ii), under the contract 
for the agency, instrumentality, or other entity to 
have such research published in a peer-reviewed 
journal or other publication, as long as the re- 
searcher enters into a data use agreement with 
the Institute for use of the data from the original 
research, as appropriate; [As revised by section 
10602(l)(A)(i) and fiij] 

"(V) have appropriate processes in place to 
manage data privacy and meet ethical standards 
for the research; 

"(VI) comply with the requirements of the In- 
stitute for making the information available to the 
public under paragraph (8); and 

"(VII) comply with other terms and conditions 
determined necessary by the Institute to carry out 
the research agenda adopted under paragraph (2). 
"(hi) Coverage of copayments or coinsur- 
ance. — A contract entered into under this subpara- 
graph may allow for the coverage of copayments or co- 
insurance, or allow for other appropriate measures, to 
the extent that such coverage or other measures are 
necessary to preserve the validity of a research 
project, such as in the case where the research project 
must be blinded. 

"(iv) Subsequent use of the data. — The Insti- 
tute shall not allow the subsequent use of data from 
original research in work-for-hire contracts with indi- 
viduals, entities, or instrumentalities that have a fi- 
nancial interest in the results, unless approved under 
a data use agreement with the Institute. [Replaced by 
section 10602(1)(BJ\ 

"(C) Review and update of evidence. — The Institute 
shall review and update evidence on a periodic basis as ap- 
propriate. 

"(D) Taking into account potential differences. — 
Research shall be designed, as appropriate, to take into ac- 
count the potential for differences in the effectiveness of 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6301U181 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



668 



health care treatments, services, and items as used with 
various subpopulations, such as racial and ethnic minori- 
ties, women, age, and groups of individuals with different 
comorbidities, genetic and molecular sub-types, or quality 
of life preferences and include members of such subpopula- 
tions as subjects in the research as feasible and appro- 
priate. 

"(E) Differences in treatment modalities. — Re- 
search shall be designed, as appropriate, to take into ac- 
count different characteristics of treatment modalities that 
may affect research outcomes, such as the phase of the 
treatment modality in the innovation cycle and the impact 
of the skill of the operator of the treatment modality. 
"(3) Data collection. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall, with appro- 
priate safeguards for privacy, make available to the Insti- 
tute such data collected by the Centers for Medicare &amp; 
Medicaid Services under the programs under titles XVIII, 
XIX, and XXI, as well as provide access to the data net- 
works developed under section 937(f) of the Public Health 
Service Act, as the Institute and its contractors may re- 
quire to carry out this section. The Institute may also re- 
quest and obtain data from Federal, State, or private enti- 
ties, including data from clinical databases and registries. 

"(B) Use of data. — The Institute shall only use data 
provided to the Institute under subparagraph (A) in ac- 
cordance with laws and regulations governing the release 
and use of such data, including applicable confidentiality 
and privacy standards. 
"(4) Appointing expert advisory panels. — 
"(A) Appointment. — 

"(i) In general. — The Institute may appoint per- 
manent or ad hoc expert advisory panels as deter- 
mined appropriate to assist in identifying research pri- 
orities and establishing the research project agenda 
under paragraph (1) and for other purposes. 

"(ii) Expert advisory panels for clinical 
trials. — The Institute shall appoint expert advisory 
panels in carrying out randomized clinical trials under 
the research project agenda under paragraph (2)(A)(ii). 
Such expert advisory panels shall advise the Institute 
and the agency, instrumentality, or entity conducting 
the research on the research question involved and the 
research design or protocol, including important pa- 
tient subgroups and other parameters of the research. 
Such panels shall be available as a resource for tech- 
nical questions that may arise during the conduct of 
such research. 

"(hi) Expert advisory panel for rare disease. — 
In the case of a research study for rare disease, the In- 
stitute shall appoint an expert advisory panel for pur- 
poses of assisting in the design of the research study 
and determining the relative value and feasibility of 
conducting the research study. 

June 9, 2010 



669 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6301M181 SSA 



"(B) Composition. — An expert advisory panel ap- 
pointed under subparagraph (A) shall include representa- 
tives of practicing and research clinicians, patients, and 
experts in scientific and health services research, health 
services delivery, and evidence-based medicine who have 
experience in the relevant topic, and as appropriate, ex- 
perts in integrative health and primary prevention strate- 
gies. The Institute may include a technical expert of each 
manufacturer or each medical technology that is included 
under the relevant topic, project, or category for which the 
panel is established. 

"(5) Supporting patient and consumer representa- 
tives. — The Institute shall provide support and resources to 
help patient and consumer representatives effectively partici- 
pate on the Board and expert advisory panels appointed by the 
Institute under paragraph (4). 

"(6) Establishing methodology committee. — 

"(A) In general. — The Institute shall establish a 
standing methodology committee to carry out the functions 
described in subparagraph (C). 

"(B) Appointment and composition. — The method- 
ology committee established under subparagraph (A) shall 
be composed of not more than 15 members appointed by 
the Comptroller General of the United States. Members 
appointed to the methodology committee shall be experts 
in their scientific field, such as health services research, 
clinical research, comparative clinical effectiveness re- 
search, biostatistics, genomics, and research methodolo- 
gies. Stakeholders with such expertise may be appointed to 
the methodology committee. In addition to the members 
appointed under the first sentence, the Directors of the 
National Institutes of Health and the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality (or their designees) shall 
each be included as members of the methodology com- 
mittee. 

"(C) Functions. — Subject to subparagraph (D), the 
methodology committee shall work to develop and improve 
the science and methods of comparative clinical effective- 
ness research by, not later than 18 months after the estab- 
lishment of the Institute, directly or through subcontract, 
developing and periodically updating the following: 

"(i) Methodological standards for research. Such 
methodological standards shall provide specific criteria 
for internal validity, generalizability, feasibility, and 
timeliness of research and for health outcomes meas- 
ures, risk adjustment, and other relevant aspects of 
research and assessment with respect to the design of 
research. Any methodological standards developed and 
updated under this subclause shall be scientifically 
based and include methods by which new information, 
data, or advances in technology are considered and in- 
corporated into ongoing research projects by the Insti- 
tute, as appropriate. The process for developing and 
updating such standards shall include input from rel- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6301U181 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



670 



evant experts, stakeholders, and decisionmakers, and 
shall provide opportunities for public comment. Such 
standards shall also include methods by which patient 
subpopulations can be accounted for and evaluated in 
different types of research. As appropriate, such stand- 
ards shall build on existing work on methodological 
standards for defined categories of health interven- 
tions and for each of the major categories of compara- 
tive clinical effectiveness research methods (deter- 
mined as of the date of enactment of the Patient Pro- 
tection and Affordable Care Act). 

"(ii) A translation table that is designed to provide 
guidance and act as a reference for the Board to deter- 
mine research methods that are most likely to address 
each specific research question. 

"(D) Consultation and conduct of examinations. — 
The methodology committee may consult and contract with 
the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies and 
academic, nonprofit, or other private and governmental en- 
tities with relevant expertise to carry out activities de- 
scribed in subparagraph (C) and may consult with relevant 
stakeholders to carry out such activities. 

"(E) Reports. — The methodology committee shall sub- 
mit reports to the Board on the committee's performance 
of the functions described in subparagraph (C). Reports 
shall contain recommendations for the Institute to adopt 
methodological standards developed and updated by the 
methodology committee as well as other actions deemed 
necessary to comply with such methodological standards. 
"(7) Providing for a peer-review process for primary 
research. — 

"(A) In general. — The Institute shall ensure that 
there is a process for peer review of primary research de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A)(ii) of paragraph (2) that is 
conducted under such paragraph. Under such process — 

"(i) evidence from such primary research shall be 

reviewed to assess scientific integrity and adherence to 

methodological standards adopted under paragraph 

(9); and 

"(ii) a list of the names of individuals contributing 
to any peer-review process during the preceding year 
or years shall be made public and included in annual 
reports in accordance with paragraph (10)(D). 
"(B) Composition. — Such peer-review process shall be 
designed in a manner so as to avoid bias and conflicts of 
interest on the part of the reviewers and shall be composed 
of experts in the scientific field relevant to the research 
under review. 

"(C) Use of existing processes — 

"(i) Processes of another entity. — In the case 
where the Institute enters into a contract or other 
agreement with another entity for the conduct or man- 
agement of research under this section, the Institute 
may utilize the peer-review process of such entity if 

June 9, 2010 



671 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6301X1181 SSA 



such process meets the requirements under subpara- 
graphs (A) and (B). 

"(ii) Processes of appropriate medical jour- 
nals. — The Institute may utilize the peer-review proc- 
ess of appropriate medical journals if such process 
meets the requirements under subparagraphs (A) and 
(B). 

"(8) Release of research findings. — 

"(A) In general. — The Institute shall, not later than 
90 days after the conduct or receipt of research findings 
under this part, make such research findings available to 
clinicians, patients, and the general public. The Institute 
shall ensure that the research findings — 

"(i) convey the findings of research in a manner 
that is comprehensible and useful to patients and pro- 
viders in making health care decisions; 

"(ii) fully convey findings and discuss consider- 
ations specific to certain subpopulations, risk factors, 
and comorbidities, as appropriate; 

"(hi) include limitations of the research and what 
further research may be needed as appropriate; 

"(iv) do not include practice guidelines, coverage 
recommendations, payment, or policy recommenda- 
tions; and [As revised by section 10602(2)~\ 

"(v) not include any data which would violate the 
privacy of research participants or any confidentiality 
agreements made with respect to the use of data 
under this section. 

"(B) Definition of research findings. — In this para- 
graph, the term 'research findings' means the results of a 
study or assessment. 

"(9) Adoption. — Subject to subsection (h)(1), the Institute 
shall adopt the national priorities identified under paragraph 
(1)(A), the research project agenda established under para- 
graph (1)(B), the methodological standards developed and up- 
dated by the methodology committee under paragraph (6)(C)(i), 
and any peer-review process provided under paragraph (7) by 
majority vote. In the case where the Institute does not adopt 
such processes in accordance with the preceding sentence, the 
processes shall be referred to the appropriate staff or entity 
within the Institute (or, in the case of the methodological 
standards, the methodology committee) for further review. 

"(10) Annual reports. — The Institute shall submit an an- 
nual report to Congress and the President, and shall make the 
annual report available to the public. Such report shall con- 
tain — 

"(A) a description of the activities conducted under 
this section, research priorities identified under paragraph 
(1)(A) and methodological standards developed and up- 
dated by the methodology committee under paragraph 
(6)(C)(i) that are adopted under paragraph (9) during the 
preceding year; 

"(B) the research project agenda and budget of the In- 
stitute for the following year; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6301U181 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



672 



"(C) any administrative activities conducted by the In- 
stitute during the preceding year; 

"(D) the names of individuals contributing to any peer- 
review process under paragraph (7), without identifying 
them with a particular research project; and 

"(E) any other relevant information (including infor- 
mation on the membership of the Board, expert advisory 
panels, methodology committee, and the executive staff of 
the Institute, any conflicts of interest with respect to these 
individuals, and any bylaws adopted by the Board during 
the preceding year). 
"(e) Administration. — 

"(1) In general. — Subject to paragraph (2), the Board 
shall carry out the duties of the Institute. 

"(2) Nondelegable duties. — The activities described in 
subsections (d)(1) and (d)(9) are nondelegable. 
"(f) Board of Governors. — 

"(1) In general. — The Institute shall have a Board of Gov- 
ernors, which shall consist of the following members: 

"(A) The Director of Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality (or the Director's designee). 

"(B) The Director of the National Institutes of Health 
(or the Director's designee). 

"(C) Seventeen members appointed, not later than 6 
months after the date of enactment of this section, by the 
Comptroller General of the United States as follows: 

"(i) 3 members representing patients and health 
care consumers. 

"(ii) 7 members representing physicians and pro- 
viders, including 4 members representing physicians 
(at least 1 of whom is a surgeon), 1 nurse, 1 State-li- 
censed integrative health care practitioner, and 1 rep- 
resentative of a hospital. [Replaced by section 
10602(3)] 

"(hi) 3 members representing private payers, of 
whom at least 1 member shall represent health insur- 
ance issuers and at least 1 member shall represent 
employers who self-insure employee benefits. 

"(iv) 3 members representing pharmaceutical, de- 
vice, and diagnostic manufacturers or developers. 

"(v) 1 member representing quality improvement 
or independent health service researchers. 

"(vi) 2 members representing the Federal Govern- 
ment or the States, including at least 1 member rep- 
resenting a Federal health program or agency. 
"(2) Qualifications. — The Board shall represent a broad 
range of perspectives and collectively have scientific expertise 
in clinical health sciences research, including epidemiology, de- 
cisions sciences, health economics, and statistics. In appointing 
the Board, the Comptroller General of the United States shall 
consider and disclose any conflicts of interest in accordance 
with subsection (h)(4)(B). Members of the Board shall be 
recused from relevant Institute activities in the case where the 
member (or an immediate family member of such member) has 

June 9, 2010 



673 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6301X1181 SSA 



a real conflict of interest directly related to the research project 
or the matter that could affect or be affected by such participa- 
tion. 

"(3) Terms; vacancies. — A member of the Board shall be 
appointed for a term of 6 years, except with respect to the 
members first appointed, whose terms of appointment shall be 
staggered evenly over 2-year increments. No individual shall 
be appointed to the Board for more than 2 terms. Vacancies 
shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment 
was made. 

"(4) Chairperson and vice-chairperson. — The Comp- 
troller General of the United States shall designate a Chair- 
person and Vice Chairperson of the Board from among the 
members of the Board. Such members shall serve as Chair- 
person or Vice Chairperson for a period of 3 years. 

"(5) Compensation. — Each member of the Board who is 
not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be 
entitled to compensation (equivalent to the rate provided for 
level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 
5, United States Code) and expenses incurred while performing 
the duties of the Board. An officer or employee of the Federal 
government who is a member of the Board shall be exempt 
from compensation. 

"(6) Director and staff; experts and consultants. — 
The Board may employ and fix the compensation of an Execu- 
tive Director and such other personnel as may be necessary to 
carry out the duties of the Institute and may seek such assist- 
ance and support of, or contract with, experts and consultants 
that may be necessary for the performance of the duties of the 
Institute. 

"(7) Meetings and hearings. — The Board shall meet and 
hold hearings at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of 
its members. Meetings not solely concerning matters of per- 
sonnel shall be advertised at least 7 days in advance and open 
to the public. A majority of the Board members shall constitute 
a quorum, but a lesser number of members may meet and hold 
hearings. 

"(g) Financial and Governmental Oversight. — 

"(1) Contract for audit. — The Institute shall provide for 
the conduct of financial audits of the Institute on an annual 
basis by a private entity with expertise in conducting financial 
audits. 

"(2) Review and annual reports. — 

"(A) Review. — The Comptroller General of the United 

States shall review the following: 

"(i) Not less frequently than on an annual basis, 
the financial audits conducted under paragraph (1). 

"(ii) Not less frequently than every 5 years, the 
processes established by the Institute, including the 
research priorities and the conduct of research 
projects, in order to determine whether information 
produced by such research projects is objective and 
credible, is produced in a manner consistent with the 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6301U181 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



674 



requirements under this section, and is developed 
through a transparent process. 

"(hi) Not less frequently than every 5 years, the 
dissemination and training activities and data net- 
works established under section 937 of the Public 
Health Service Act, including the methods and prod- 
ucts used to disseminate research, the types of train- 
ing conducted and supported, and the types and func- 
tions of the data networks established, in order to de- 
termine whether the activities and data are produced 
in a manner consistent with the requirements under 
such section. 

"(iv) Not less frequently than every 5 years, the 
overall effectiveness of activities conducted under this 
section and the dissemination, training, and capacity 
building activities conducted under section 937 of the 
Public Health Service Act. Such review shall include 
an analysis of the extent to which research findings 
are used by health care decision-makers, the effect of 
the dissemination of such findings on reducing prac- 
tice variation and disparities in health care, and the 
effect of the research conducted and disseminated on 
innovation and the health care economy of the United 
States. 

"(v) Not later than 8 years after the date of enact- 
ment of this section, the adequacy and use of the fund- 
ing for the Institute and the activities conducted under 
section 937 of the Public Health Service Act, including 
a determination as to whether, based on the utiliza- 
tion of research findings by public and private payers, 
funding sources for the Patient-Centered Outcomes 
Research Trust Fund under section 9511 of the Inter- 
nal Revenue Code of 1986 are appropriate and wheth- 
er such sources of funding should be continued or ad- 
justed. 

"(B) Annual reports. — Not later than April 1 of each 
year, the Comptroller General of the United States shall 
submit to Congress a report containing the results of the 
review conducted under subparagraph (A) with respect to 
the preceding year (or years, if applicable), together with 
recommendations for such legislation and administrative 
action as the Comptroller General determines appropriate. 
"(h) Ensuring Transparency, Credibility, and Access. — The 
Institute shall establish procedures to ensure that the following re- 
quirements for ensuring transparency, credibility, and access are 
met: 

"(1) Public comment periods. — The Institute shall pro- 
vide for a public comment period of not less than 45 days and 
not more than 60 days prior to the adoption under subsection 
(d)(9) of the national priorities identified under subsection 
(d)(1)(A), the research project agenda established under sub- 
section (d)(1)(B), the methodological standards developed and 
updated by the methodology committee under subsection 
(d)(6)(C)(i), and the peer-review process provided under para- 
June 9, 2010 



675 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6301X1181 SSA 



graph (7), and after the release of draft findings with respect 
to systematic reviews of existing research and evidence. 

"(2) Additional forums. — The Institute shall support fo- 
rums to increase public awareness and obtain and incorporate 
public input and feedback through media (such as an Internet 
website) on research priorities, research findings, and other du- 
ties, activities, or processes the Institute determines appro- 
priate. 

"(3) Public availability. — The Institute shall make avail- 
able to the public and disclose through the official public Inter- 
net website of the Institute the following: 

"(A) Information contained in research findings as 
specified in subsection (d)(9). 

"(B) The process and methods for the conduct of re- 
search, including the identity of the entity and the inves- 
tigators conducing such research and any conflicts of inter- 
ests of such parties, any direct or indirect links the entity 
has to industry, and research protocols, including meas- 
ures taken, methods of research and analysis, research re- 
sults, and such other information the Institute determines 
appropriate) concurrent with the release of research find- 
ings. 

"(C) Notice of public comment periods under para- 
graph (1), including deadlines for public comments. 

"(D) Subsequent comments received during each of the 
public comment periods. 

"(E) In accordance with applicable laws and processes 
and as the Institute determines appropriate, proceedings 
of the Institute. 

"(4) Disclosure of conflicts of interest. — 

"(A) In general. — A conflict of interest shall be dis- 
closed in the following manner: 

"(i) By the Institute in appointing members to an 
expert advisory panel under subsection (d)(4), in se- 
lecting individuals to contribute to any peer-review 
process under subsection (d)(7), and for employment as 
executive staff of the Institute. 

"(ii) By the Comptroller General in appointing 
members of the methodology committee under sub- 
section (d)(6); 

"(hi) By the Institute in the annual report under 
subsection (d)(10), except that, in the case of individ- 
uals contributing to any such peer review process, 
such description shall be in a manner such that those 
individuals cannot be identified with a particular re- 
search project. 

"(B) Manner of disclosure. — Conflicts of interest 
shall be disclosed as described in subparagraph (A) as soon 
as practicable on the Internet web site of the Institute and 
of the Government Accountability Office. The information 
disclosed under the preceding sentence shall include the 
type, nature, and magnitude of the interests of the indi- 
vidual involved, except to the extent that the individual 
recuses himself or herself from participating in the consid- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6301 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



676 



eration of or any other activity with respect to the study 
as to which the potential conflict exists, 
"(i) Rules. — The Institute, its Board or staff, shall be prohib- 
ited from accepting gifts, bequeaths, or donations of services or 
property. In addition, the Institute shall be prohibited from estab- 
lishing a corporation or generating revenues from activities other 
than as provided under this section, 
"(j) Rules of Construction. — 

"(1) Coverage. — Nothing in this section shall be con- 
strued — 

"(A) to permit the Institute to mandate coverage, reim- 
bursement, or other policies for any public or private 
payer; or 

"(B) as preventing the Secretary from covering the 
routine costs of clinical care received by an individual enti- 
tled to, or enrolled for, benefits under title XVIII, XIX, or 
XXI in the case where such individual is participating in 
a clinical trial and such costs would otherwise be covered 
under such title with respect to the beneficiary.", 
(b) Dissemination and Building Capacity for Research. — 
Title IX of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299 et seq.), 
as amended by section 3606, is further amended by inserting after 
section 936 the following: 

"SEC. 937 [42 U.S.C. 299b-37]. DISSEMINATION AND BUILDING CAPAC- 
ITY FOR RESEARCH. 

"(a) In General. — 

"(1) Dissemination. — The Office of Communication and 
Knowledge Transfer (referred to in this section as the 'Office') 
at the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (or any 
other relevant office designated by Agency for Healthcare Re- 
search and Quality), in consultation with the National Insti- 
tutes of Health, shall broadly disseminate the research find- 
ings that are published by the Patient Centered Outcomes Re- 
search Institute established under section 1181(b) of the Social 
Security Act (referred to in this section as the 'Institute') and 
other government -funded research relevant to comparative 
clinical effectiveness research. The Office shall create informa- 
tional tools that organize and disseminate research findings for 
physicians, health care providers, patients, payers, and policy 
makers. The Office shall also develop a publicly available re- 
source database that collects and contains government-funded 
evidence and research from public, private, not-for profit, and 
academic sources. 

"(2) Requirements. — The Office shall provide for the dis- 
semination of the Institute's research findings and govern- 
ment-funded research relevant to comparative clinical effec- 
tiveness research to physicians, health care providers, patients, 
vendors of health information technology focused on clinical de- 
cision support, appropriate professional associations, and Fed- 
eral and private health plans. Materials, forums, and media 
used to disseminate the findings, informational tools, and re- 
source databases shall — 

"(A) include a description of considerations for specific 

subpopulations, the research methodology, and the limita- 

June 9, 2010 



677 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6301U182 SSA 



tions of the research, and the names of the entities, agen- 
cies, instrumentalities, and individuals who conducted any 
research which was published by the Institute; and 

"(B) not be construed as mandates, guidelines, or rec- 
ommendations for payment, coverage, or treatment. 
"(b) Incorporation of Research Findings. — The Office, in 
consultation with relevant medical and clinical associations, shall 
assist users of health information technology focused on clinical de- 
cision support to promote the timely incorporation of research find- 
ings disseminated under subsection (a) into clinical practices and 
to promote the ease of use of such incorporation. 

"(c) Feedback. — The Office shall establish a process to receive 
feedback from physicians, health care providers, patients, and ven- 
dors of health information technology focused on clinical decision 
support, appropriate professional associations, and Federal and pri- 
vate health plans about the value of the information disseminated 
and the assistance provided under this section. 

"(d) Rule of Construction. — Nothing in this section shall 
preclude the Institute from making its research findings publicly 
available as required under section 1181(d)(8) of the Social Security 
Act. 

"(e) Training of Researchers. — The Agency for Health Care 
Research and Quality, in consultation with the National Institutes 
of Health, shall build capacity for comparative clinical effectiveness 
research by establishing a grant program that provides for the 
training of researchers in the methods used to conduct such re- 
search, including systematic reviews of existing research and pri- 
mary research such as clinical trials. At a minimum, such training 
shall be in methods that meet the methodological standards adopt- 
ed under section 1181(d)(9) of the Social Security Act. 

"(f) Building Data for Research. — The Secretary shall pro- 
vide for the coordination of relevant Federal health programs to 
build data capacity for comparative clinical effectiveness research, 
including the development and use of clinical registries and health 
outcomes research data networks, in order to develop and maintain 
a comprehensive, interoperable data network to collect, link, and 
analyze data on outcomes and effectiveness from multiple sources, 
including electronic health records. 

"(g) Authority To Contract With the Institute. — Agencies 
and instrumentalities of the Federal Government may enter into 
agreements with the Institute, and accept and retain funds, for the 
conduct and support of research described in this part, provided 
that the research to be conducted or supported under such agree- 
ments is authorized under the governing statutes of such agencies 
and instrumentalities.". 

(c) In General. — Part D of title XI of the Social Security Act, 
as added by subsection (a), is amended by adding at the end the 
following new section: 

"limitations on certain uses of comparative clinical 
effectiveness research 

"Sec. 1182 [42 U.S.C. 1320e-l]. (a) The Secretary may only 
use evidence and findings from research conducted under section 
1181 to make a determination regarding coverage under title XVIII 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6301U182 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



678 



if such use is through an iterative and transparent process which 
includes public comment and considers the effect on subpopula- 
tions. 

"(b) Nothing in section 1181 shall be construed as — 

"(1) superceding or modifying the coverage of items or 

services under title XVIII that the Secretary determines are 

reasonable and necessary under section 1862(1)(1); or 

"(2) authorizing the Secretary to deny coverage of items or 

services under such title solely on the basis of comparative 

clinical effectiveness research. 

"(c)(1) The Secretary shall not use evidence or findings from 
comparative clinical effectiveness research conducted under section 
1181 in determining coverage, reimbursement, or incentive pro- 
grams under title XVIII in a manner that treats extending the life 
of an elderly, disabled, or terminally ill individual as of lower value 
than extending the life of an individual who is younger, non- 
disabled, or not terminally ill. 

"(2) Paragraph (1) shall not be construed as preventing the 
Secretary from using evidence or findings from such comparative 
clinical effectiveness research in determining coverage, reimburse- 
ment, or incentive programs under title XVIII based upon a com- 
parison of the difference in the effectiveness of alternative treat- 
ments in extending an individual's life due to the individual's age, 
disability, or terminal illness. 

"(d)(1) The Secretary shall not use evidence or findings from 
comparative clinical effectiveness research conducted under section 
1181 in determining coverage, reimbursement, or incentive pro- 
grams under title XVIII in a manner that precludes, or with the 
intent to discourage, an individual from choosing a health care 
treatment based on how the individual values the tradeoff between 
extending the length of their life and the risk of disability. 
"(2)(A) Paragraph (1) shall not be construed to — 

"(i) limit the application of differential copayments under 
title XVIII based on factors such as cost or type of service; or 
"(ii) prevent the Secretary from using evidence or findings 
from such comparative clinical effectiveness research in deter- 
mining coverage, reimbursement, or incentive programs under 
such title based upon a comparison of the difference in the ef- 
fectiveness of alternative health care treatments in extending 
an individual's life due to that individual's age, disability, or 
terminal illness. 

"(3) Nothing in the provisions of, or amendments made by the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, shall be construed to 
limit comparative clinical effectiveness research or any other re- 
search, evaluation, or dissemination of information concerning the 
likelihood that a health care treatment will result in disability. 

"(e) The Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute estab- 
lished under section 1181(b)(1) shall not develop or employ a dol- 
lars-per-quality adjusted life year (or similar measure that dis- 
counts the value of a life because of an individual's disability) as 
a threshold to establish what type of health care is cost effective 
or recommended. The Secretary shall not utilize such an adjusted 
life year (or such a similar measure) as a threshold to determine 

June 9, 2010 



679 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6301\9511 IRC 



coverage, reimbursement, or incentive programs under title 
XVIII.". 

(d) In General. — Part D of title XI of the Social Security Act, 
as added by subsection (a) and amended by subsection (c), is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section: 

"trust fund transfers to patient-centered outcomes 
research trust fund 

"Sec. 1183 [42 U.S.C. 1320e-2]. (a) In General.— The Sec- 
retary shall provide for the transfer, from the Federal Hospital In- 
surance Trust Fund under section 1817 and the Federal Supple- 
mentary Medical Insurance Trust Fund under section 1841, in pro- 
portion (as estimated by the Secretary) to the total expenditures 
during such fiscal year that are made under title XVIII from the 
respective trust fund, to the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research 
Trust Fund (referred to in this section as the 'PCORTF') under sec- 
tion 9511 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, of the following: 
"(1) For fiscal year 2013, an amount equal to $1 multiplied 
by the average number of individuals entitled to benefits under 
part A, or enrolled under part B, of title XVIII during such fis- 
cal year. 

"(2) For each of fiscal years 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 
and 2019, an amount equal to $2 multiplied by the average 
number of individuals entitled to benefits under part A, or en- 
rolled under part B, of title XVIII during such fiscal year. 
"(b) Adjustments for Increases in Health Care Spend- 
ing. — In the case of any fiscal year beginning after September 30, 
2014, the dollar amount in effect under subsection (a)(2) for such 
fiscal year shall be equal to the sum of such dollar amount for the 
previous fiscal year (determined after the application of this sub- 
section), plus an amount equal to the product of — 

"(1) such dollar amount for the previous fiscal year, multi- 
plied by 

"(2) the percentage increase in the projected per capita 
amount of National Health Expenditures, as most recently 
published by the Secretary before the beginning of the fiscal 
year.". 

(e) Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Trust Fund; Fi- 
nancing for Trust Fund. — 

(1) Establishment of trust fund. — 

(A) In general. — Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to establishment 
of trust funds) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new section: 

"SEC. 9511. PATIENT-CENTERED OUTCOMES RESEARCH TRUST FUND. 

"(a) Creation of Trust Fund. — There is established in the 
Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the 'Pa- 
tient-Centered Outcomes Research Trust Fund' (hereafter in this 
section referred to as the 'PCORTF'), consisting of such amounts as 
may be appropriated or credited to such Trust Fund as provided in 
this section and section 9602(b). 

"(b) Transfers to Fund. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. B301N9511 IRC 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



680 



"(1) Appropriation. — There are hereby appropriated to the 
Trust Fund the following: 

"(A) For fiscal year 2010, $10,000,000. 
"(B) For fiscal year 2011, $50,000,000. 
"(C) For fiscal year 2012, $150,000,000. 
"(D) For fiscal year 2013— 

"(i) an amount equivalent to the net revenues re- 
ceived in the Treasury from the fees imposed under 
subchapter B of chapter 34 (relating to fees on health 
insurance and self-insured plans) for such fiscal year; 
and 

"(ii) $150,000,000. 
"(E) For each of fiscal years 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 
2018, and 2019— 

"(i) an amount equivalent to the net revenues re- 
ceived in the Treasury from the fees imposed under 
subchapter B of chapter 34 (relating to fees on health 
insurance and self-insured plans) for such fiscal year; 
and 

"(ii) $150,000,000. 
The amounts appropriated under subparagraphs (A), (B), 
(C), (D)(ii), and (E)(ii) shall be transferred from the general 
fund of the Treasury, from funds not otherwise appro- 
priated. 

"(2) Trust fund transfers. — In addition to the amounts 
appropriated under paragraph (1), there shall be credited to 
the PCORTF the amounts transferred under section 1183 of 
the Social Security Act. 

"(3) Limitation on transfers to pcortf. — No amount 
may be appropriated or transferred to the PCORTF on and 
after the date of any expenditure from the PCORTF which is 
not an expenditure permitted under this section. The deter- 
mination of whether an expenditure is so permitted shall be 
made without regard to — 

"(A) any provision of law which is not contained or ref- 
erenced in this chapter or in a revenue Act, and 

"(B) whether such provision of law is a subsequently 
enacted provision or directly or indirectly seeks to waive 
the application of this paragraph. 
"(c) Trustee. — The Secretary of the Treasury shall be a trustee 
of the PCORTF. 

"(d) Expenditures From Fund. — 

"(1) Amounts available to the patient-centered out- 
comes research institute. — Subject to paragraph (2), 
amounts in the PCORTF are available, without further appro- 
priation, to the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute 
established under section 1181(b) of the Social Security Act for 
carrying out part D of title XI of the Social Security Act (as in 
effect on the date of enactment of such Act). 
"(2) Transfer of funds. — 

"(A) In general.— The trustee of the PCORTF shall 
provide for the transfer from the PCORTF of 20 percent of 
the amounts appropriated or credited to the PCORTF for 
each of fiscal years 2011 through 2019 to the Secretary of 

June 9, 2010 



681 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6301X4375 IRC 



Health and Human Services to carry out section 937 of the 
Public Health Service Act. 

"(B) Availability. — Amounts transferred under sub- 
paragraph (A) shall remain available until expended. 

"(C) Requirements. — Of the amounts transferred 
under subparagraph (A) with respect to a fiscal year, the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services shall distribute — 
"(i) 80 percent to the Office of Communication and 
Knowledge Transfer of the Agency for Healthcare Re- 
search and Quality (or any other relevant office des- 
ignated by Agency for Healthcare Research and Qual- 
ity) to carry out the activities described in section 937 
of the Public Health Service Act; and 

"(ii) 20 percent to the Secretary to carry out the 
activities described in such section 937. 
"(e) Net Revenues. — For purposes of this section, the term 
'net revenues' means the amount estimated by the Secretary of the 
Treasury based on the excess of — 

"(1) the fees received in the Treasury under subchapter B 
of chapter 34, over 

"(2) the decrease in the tax imposed by chapter 1 resulting 
from the fees imposed by such subchapter. 
"(f) Termination. — No amounts shall be available for expendi- 
ture from the PCORTF after September 30, 2019, and any amounts 
in such Trust Fund after such date shall be transferred to the gen- 
eral fund of the Treasury.". 

(B) Clerical amendment. — The table of sections for 
subchapter A of chapter 98 of such Code is amended by 
adding at the end the following new item: 

"Sec. 9511. Patient-centered outcomes research trust fund.". 

(2) Financing for fund from fees on insured and self- 
insured HEALTH PLANS. — 

(A) General rule. — Chapter 34 of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subchapter: 

"Subchapter B — Insured and Self-Insured Health Plans 

"Sec. 4375. Health insurance. 

"Sec. 4376. Self-insured health plans. 

"Sec. 4377. Definitions and special rules. 

"SEC. 4375. HEALTH INSURANCE. 

"(a) Imposition of Fee. — There is hereby imposed on each 
specified health insurance policy for each policy year ending after 
September 30, 2012, a fee equal to the product of $2 ($1 in the case 
of policy years ending during fiscal year 2013) multiplied by the av- 
erage number of lives covered under the policy. 

"(b) Liability for Fee. — The fee imposed by subsection (a) 
shall be paid by the issuer of the policy. 

"(c) Specified Health Insurance Policy. — For purposes of 
this section: 

"(1) In general. — Except as otherwise provided in this 
section, the term 'specified health insurance policy' means any 
accident or health insurance policy (including a policy under a 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6301\4376 IRC 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



682 



group health plan) issued with respect to individuals residing 
in the United States. 

"(2) Exemption for certain policies. — The term 'speci- 
fied health insurance policy' does not include any insurance if 
substantially all of its coverage is of excepted benefits de- 
scribed in section 9832(c). 

"(3) Treatment of prepaid health coverage arrange- 
ments. — 

"(A) In general. — In the case of any arrangement de- 
scribed in subparagraph (B), such arrangement shall be 
treated as a specified health insurance policy, and the per- 
son referred to in such subparagraph shall be treated as 
the issuer. 

"(B) Description of arrangements. — An arrange- 
ment is described in this subparagraph if under such ar- 
rangement fixed payments or premiums are received as 
consideration for any person's agreement to provide or ar- 
range for the provision of accident or health coverage to 
residents of the United States, regardless of how such cov- 
erage is provided or arranged to be provided. 
"(d) Adjustments for Increases in Health Care Spend- 
ing. — In the case of any policy year ending in any fiscal year begin- 
ning after September 30, 2014, the dollar amount in effect under 
subsection (a) for such policy year shall be equal to the sum of such 
dollar amount for policy years ending in the previous fiscal year 
(determined after the application of this subsection), plus an 
amount equal to the product of — 

"(1) such dollar amount for policy years ending in the pre- 
vious fiscal year, multiplied by 

"(2) the percentage increase in the projected per capita 
amount of National Health Expenditures, as most recently 
published by the Secretary before the beginning of the fiscal 
year. 

"(e) Termination. — This section shall not apply to policy years 
ending after September 30, 2019. 

"SEC. 4376. SELF-INSURED HEALTH PLANS. 

"(a) Imposition of Fee. — In the case of any applicable self-in- 
sured health plan for each plan year ending after September 30, 
2012, there is hereby imposed a fee equal to $2 ($1 in the case of 
plan years ending during fiscal year 2013) multiplied by the aver- 
age number of lives covered under the plan. 
"(b) Liability for Fee. — 

"(1) In general. — The fee imposed by subsection (a) shall 
be paid by the plan sponsor. 

"(2) Plan sponsor. — For purposes of paragraph (1) the 
term 'plan sponsor' means — 

"(A) the employer in the case of a plan established or 
maintained by a single employer, 

"(B) the employee organization in the case of a plan 
established or maintained by an employee organization, 
"(C) in the case of — 

June 9, 2010 



683 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6301X4377 IRC 



"(i) a plan established or maintained by 2 or more 
employers or jointly by 1 or more employers and 1 or 
more employee organizations, 

"(ii) a multiple employer welfare arrangement, or 
"(iii) a voluntary employees' beneficiary associa- 
tion described in section 501(c)(9), the association, 
committee, joint board of trustees, or other similar 
group of representatives of the parties who establish 
or maintain the plan, or 

"(D) the cooperative or association described in sub- 
section (c)(2)(F) in the case of a plan established or main- 
tained by such a cooperative or association. 
"(c) Applicable Self-insured Health Plan. — For purposes of 
this section, the term 'applicable self-insured health plan' means 
any plan for providing accident or health coverage if — 

"(1) any portion of such coverage is provided other than 
through an insurance policy, and 

"(2) such plan is established or maintained — 

"(A) by 1 or more employers for the benefit of their 
employees or former employees, 

"(B) by 1 or more employee organizations for the ben- 
efit of their members or former members, 

"(C) jointly by 1 or more employers and 1 or more em- 
ployee organizations for the benefit of employees or former 
employees, 

"(D) by a voluntary employees' beneficiary association 
described in section 501(c)(9), 

"(E) by any organization described in section 501(c)(6), 

or 

"(F) in the case of a plan not described in the pre- 
ceding subparagraphs, by a multiple employer welfare ar- 
rangement (as defined in section 3(40) of Employee Retire- 
ment Income Security Act of 1974), a rural electric cooper- 
ative (as defined in section 3(40)(B)(iv) of such Act), or a 
rural telephone cooperative association (as defined in sec- 
tion 3(40)(B)(v) of such Act). 
"(d) Adjustments for Increases in Health Care Spend- 
ing. — In the case of any plan year ending in any fiscal year begin- 
ning after September 30, 2014, the dollar amount in effect under 
subsection (a) for such plan year shall be equal to the sum of such 
dollar amount for plan years ending in the previous fiscal year (de- 
termined after the application of this subsection), plus an amount 
equal to the product of — 

"(1) such dollar amount for plan years ending in the pre- 
vious fiscal year, multiplied by 

"(2) the percentage increase in the projected per capita 
amount of National Health Expenditures, as most recently 
published by the Secretary before the beginning of the fiscal 
year. 

"(e) Termination. — This section shall not apply to plan years 
ending after September 30, 2019. 

"SEC. 4377. DEFINITIONS AND SPECIAL RULES. 

"(a) Definitions. — For purposes of this subchapter — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6301 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



684 



"(1) Accident and health coverage. — The term 'accident 
and health coverage' means any coverage which, if provided by 
an insurance policy, would cause such policy to be a specified 
health insurance policy (as defined in section 4375(c)). 

"(2) Insurance policy. — The term 'insurance policy' 
means any policy or other instrument whereby a contract of in- 
surance is issued, renewed, or extended. 

"(3) United states. — The term 'United States' includes 
any possession of the United States. 
"(b) Treatment of Governmental Entities. — 

"(1) In general. — For purposes of this subchapter — 

"(A) the term 'person' includes any governmental enti- 
ty, and 

"(B) notwithstanding any other law or rule of law, gov- 
ernmental entities shall not be exempt from the fees im- 
posed by this subchapter except as provided in paragraph 
(2). 

"(2) Treatment of exempt governmental programs. — In 
the case of an exempt governmental program, no fee shall be 
imposed under section 4375 or section 4376 on any covered life 
under such program. 

"(3) Exempt governmental program defined. — For pur- 
poses of this subchapter, the term 'exempt governmental pro- 
gram' means — 

"(A) any insurance program established under title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act, 

"(B) the medical assistance program established by 
title XIX or XXI of the Social Security Act, 

"(C) any program established by Federal law for pro- 
viding medical care (other than through insurance policies) 
to individuals (or the spouses and dependents thereof) by 
reason of such individuals being members of the Armed 
Forces of the United States or veterans, and 

"(D) any program established by Federal law for pro- 
viding medical care (other than through insurance policies) 
to members of Indian tribes (as defined in section 4(d) of 
the Indian Health Care Improvement Act). 
"(c) Treatment as Tax. — For purposes of subtitle F, the fees 
imposed by this subchapter shall be treated as if they were taxes. 

"(d) No Cover Over to Possessions. — Notwithstanding any 
other provision of law, no amount collected under this subchapter 
shall be covered over to any possession of the United States.". 
(B) Clerical amendments. — 

(i) Chapter 34 of such Code is amended by strik- 
ing the chapter heading and inserting the following: 



685 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6401 



"CHAPTER 34— TAXES ON CERTAIN INSURANCE 
POLICIES 

"SUBCHAPTER A. POLICIES ISSUED BY FOREIGN INSURERS 
"SUBCHAPTER B. INSURED AND SELF-INSURED HEALTH PLANS 

"Subchapter A — Policies Issued By Foreign Insurers". 

(ii) The table of chapters for subtitle D of such 
Code is amended by striking the item relating to chap- 
ter 34 and inserting the following new item: 

"Chapter 34 — Taxes on Certain Insurance Policies". 

(f) Tax-exempt Status of the Patient-centered Outcomes 
Research Institute. — Subsection 501(1) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph: 

"(4) The Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute es- 
tablished under section 1181(b) of the Social Security Act.". 

SEC. 6302. FEDERAL COORDINATING COUNCIL FOR COMPARATIVE EF- 
FECTPVENESS RESEARCH. 

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Federal Co- 
ordinating Council for Comparative Effectiveness Research estab- 
lished under section 804 of Division A of the American Recovery 
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (42 U.S.C. 299b-8), including the re- 
quirement under subsection (e)(2) of such section, shall terminate 
on the date of enactment of this Act. 

Subtitle E— Medicare, Medicaid, and CHIP 
Program Integrity Provisions 

SEC. 6401. PROVIDER SCREENING AND OTHER ENROLLMENT RE- 
QUIREMENTS UNDER MEDICARE, MEDICAID, AND CHIP. 

(a) Medicare. — Section 1866(j) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395cc(j)) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (1)(A), by adding at the end the following: 
"Such process shall include screening of providers and sup- 
pliers in accordance with paragraph (2), a provisional period of 
enhanced oversight in accordance with paragraph (3), disclo- 
sure requirements in accordance with paragraph (4), the impo- 
sition of temporary enrollment moratoria in accordance with 
paragraph (5), and the establishment of compliance programs 
in accordance with paragraph (6)."; 

(2) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (8); and 
[Replaced by section 10603(b)] 

(3) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following: 
"(2) Provider screening. — 

"(A) Procedures. — Not later than 180 days after the 
date of enactment of this paragraph, the Secretary, in con- 
sultation with the Inspector General of the Department of 
Health and Human Services, shall establish procedures 
under which screening is conducted with respect to pro- 
viders of medical or other items or services and suppliers 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6401 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



686 



under the program under this title, the Medicaid program 
under title XIX, and the CHIP program under title XXI. 

"(B) Level of screening. — The Secretary shall deter- 
mine the level of screening conducted under this para- 
graph according to the risk of fraud, waste, and abuse, as 
determined by the Secretary, with respect to the category 
of provider of medical or other items or services or sup- 
plier. Such screening — 

"(i) shall include a licensure check, which may in- 
clude such checks across States; and 

"(ii) may, as the Secretary determines appropriate 
based on the risk of fraud, waste, and abuse described 
in the preceding sentence, include — 

"(I) a criminal background check; 
"(II) fingerprinting; 

"(III) unscheduled and unannounced site vis- 
its, including preenrollment site visits; 

"(IV) database checks (including such checks 
across States); and 

"(V) such other screening as the Secretary de- 
termines appropriate. 
"(C) Application fees. — [As revised by section 
10603(a)] 

"(i) Institutional providers. — Except as pro- 
vided in clause (ii), the Secretary shall impose a fee on 
each institutional provider of medical or other items or 
services or supplier (such as a hospital or skilled nurs- 
ing facility) with respect to which screening is con- 
ducted under this paragraph in an amount equal to — 
"(I) for 2010, $500; and 

"(II) for 2011 and each subsequent year, the 
amount determined under this clause for the pre- 
ceding year, adjusted by the percentage change in 
the consumer price index for all urban consumers 
(all items; United States city average) for the 12- 
month period ending with June of the previous 
year. 

"(ii) Hardship exception; waiver for certain 
medicaid providers. — The Secretary may, on a case- 
by-case basis, exempt a provider of medical or other 
items or services or supplier from the imposition of an 
application fee under this subparagraph if the Sec- 
retary determines that the imposition of the applica- 
tion fee would result in a hardship. The Secretary may 
waive the application fee under this subparagraph for 
providers enrolled in a State Medicaid program for 
whom the State demonstrates that imposition of the 
fee would impede beneficiary access to care. 

"(hi) Use of funds. — Amounts collected as a re- 
sult of the imposition of a fee under this subparagraph 
shall be used by the Secretary for program integrity 
efforts, including to cover the costs of conducting 
screening under this paragraph and to carry out this 
subsection and section 1128 J. 

June 9, 2010 



687 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6401 



"(D) Application and enforcement. — 

"(i) New providers of services and suppliers. — 
The screening under this paragraph shall apply, in the 
case of a provider of medical or other items or services 
or supplier who is not enrolled in the program under 
this title, title XIX , or title XXI as of the date of en- 
actment of this paragraph, on or after the date that is 
1 year after such date of enactment. 

"(ii) Current providers of services and sup- 
pliers. — The screening under this paragraph shall 
apply, in the case of a provider of medical or other 
items or services or supplier who is enrolled in the 
program under this title, title XIX, or title XXI as of 
such date of enactment, on or after the date that is 2 
years after such date of enactment. 

"(hi) Revalidation of enrollment. — Effective 
beginning on the date that is 180 days after such date 
of enactment, the screening under this paragraph 
shall apply with respect to the revalidation of enroll- 
ment of a provider of medical or other items or serv- 
ices or supplier in the program under this title, title 
XIX, or title XXI. 

"(iv) Limitation on enrollment and revalida- 
tion of enrollment. — In no case may a provider of 
medical or other items or services or supplier who has 
not been screened under this paragraph be initially 
enrolled or reenrolled in the program under this title, 
title XIX, or title XXI on or after the date that is 3 
years after such date of enactment. 
"(E) Expedited rulemaking. — The Secretary may pro- 
mulgate an interim final rule to carry out this paragraph. 
"(3) Provisional period of enhanced oversight for 
new providers of services and suppliers. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall establish proce- 
dures to provide for a provisional period of not less than 
30 days and not more than 1 year during which new pro- 
viders of medical or other items or services and suppliers, 
as the Secretary determines appropriate, including cat- 
egories of providers or suppliers, would be subject to en- 
hanced oversight, such as prepayment review and payment 
caps, under the program under this title, the Medicaid pro- 
gram under title XIX. and the CHIP program under title 
XXI. 

"(B) Implementation. — The Secretary may establish 
by program instruction or otherwise the procedures under 
this paragraph. 

"(4) 90-DAY PERIOD OF ENHANCED OVERSIGHT FOR INITIAL 

claims of dme suppliers. — [As added by section 1304 of 
HCERA\ For periods beginning after January 1, 2011, if the 
Secretary determines that there is a significant risk of fraudu- 
lent activity among suppliers of durable medical equipment, in 
the case of a supplier of durable medical equipment who is 
within a category or geographic area under title XVIII identi- 
fied pursuant to such determination and who is initially enroll- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6401 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



688 



ing under such title, the Secretary shall, notwithstanding sec- 
tions 1816(c), 1842(c), and 1869(a)(2), withhold payment under 
such title with respect to durable medical equipment furnished 
by such supplier during the 90-day period beginning on the 
date of the first submission of a claim under such title for du- 
rable medical equipment furnished by such supplier. 
[Subsequent paragraphs reflect redesignation by section 1304 of 
HCERA | 

"(5) Increased disclosure requirements. — 

"(A) Disclosure. — A provider of medical or other 
items or services or supplier who submits an application 
for enrollment or revalidation of enrollment in the pro- 
gram under this title, title XIX, or title XXI on or after the 
date that is 1 year after the date of enactment of this 
paragraph shall disclose (in a form and manner and at 
such time as determined by the Secretary) any current or 
previous affiliation (directly or indirectly) with a provider 
of medical or other items or services or supplier that has 
uncollected debt, has been or is subject to a payment sus- 
pension under a Federal health care program (as defined 
in section 1128B(f)), has been excluded from participation 
under the program under this title, the Medicaid program 
under title XIX, or the CHIP program under title XXI, or 
has had its billing privileges denied or revoked. 

"(B) Authority to deny enrollment. — If the Sec- 
retary determines that such previous affiliation poses an 
undue risk of fraud, waste, or abuse, the Secretary may 
deny such application. Such a denial shall be subject to ap- 
peal in accordance with paragraph (7). 
"(6) Authority to adjust payments of providers of 
services and suppliers with the same tax identification 
number for past-due obligations. — 

"(A) In GENERAL. — Notwithstanding any other provi- 
sion of this title, in the case of an applicable provider of 
services or supplier, the Secretary may make any nec- 
essary adjustments to payments to the applicable provider 
of services or supplier under the program under this title 
in order to satisfy any past-due obligations described in 
subparagraph (B)(ii) of an obligated provider of services or 
supplier. 

"(B) Definitions. — In this paragraph: 

"(i) In general. — The term 'applicable provider of 
services or supplier' means a provider of services or 
supplier that has the same taxpayer identification 
number assigned under section 6109 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 as is assigned to the obligated 
provider of services or supplier under such section, re- 
gardless of whether the applicable provider of services 
or supplier is assigned a different billing number or 
national provider identification number under the pro- 
gram under this title than is assigned to the obligated 
provider of services or supplier. 

"(ii) Obligated provider of services or sup- 
plier. — The term 'obligated provider of services or 

June 9, 2010 



689 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6401 



supplier' means a provider of services or supplier that 
owes a past-due obligation under the program under 
this title (as determined by the Secretary). 
"(7) Temporary moratorium on enrollment of new 
providers. — 

"(A) In GENERAL. — The Secretary may impose a tem- 
porary moratorium on the enrollment of new providers of 
services and suppliers, including categories of providers of 
services and suppliers, in the program under this title, 
under the Medicaid program under title XIX, or under the 
CHIP program under title XXI if the Secretary determines 
such moratorium is necessary to prevent or combat fraud, 
waste, or abuse under either such program. 

"(B) Limitation on review. — There shall be no judi- 
cial review under section 1869, section 1878, or otherwise, 
of a temporary moratorium imposed under subparagraph 
(A). 

"(8) Compliance programs. — 

"(A) In general. — On or after the date of implementa- 
tion determined by the Secretary under subparagraph (C), 
a provider of medical or other items or services or supplier 
within a particular industry sector or category shall, as a 
condition of enrollment in the program under this title, 
title XIX, or title XXI, establish a compliance program that 
contains the core elements established under subpara- 
graph (B) with respect to that provider or supplier and in- 
dustry or category. 

"(B) Establishment of core elements. — The Sec- 
retary, in consultation with the Inspector General of the 
Department of Health and Human Services, shall establish 
core elements for a compliance program under subpara- 
graph (A) for providers or suppliers within a particular in- 
dustry or category. 

"(C) Timeline for implementation. — The Secretary 
shall determine the timeline for the establishment of the 
core elements under subparagraph (B) and the date of the 
implementation of subparagraph (A) for providers or sup- 
pliers within a particular industry or category. The Sec- 
retary shall, in determining such date of implementation, 
consider the extent to which the adoption of compliance 
programs by a provider of medical or other items or serv- 
ices or supplier is widespread in a particular industry sec- 
tor or with respect to a particular provider or supplier cat- 
egory.", 
(b) Medicaid. — 

(1) State plan amendment. — Section 1902(a) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)), as amended by section 
4302(b), is amended— 

(A) in subsection (a) — 

(i) by striking "and" at the end of paragraph (75); 

(ii) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
(76) and inserting a semicolon; and 

(iii) by inserting after paragraph (76) the fol- 
lowing: 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6401 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



690 



"(77) provide that the State shall comply with provider and 
supplier screening, oversight, and reporting requirements in 
accordance with subsection (ii);"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following: 
"(ii) Provider and Supplier Screening, Oversight, and Re- 
porting Requirements. — For purposes of subsection (a)(77), the 
requirements of this subsection are the following: 

"(1) Screening. — The State complies with the process for 
screening providers and suppliers under this title, as estab- 
lished by the Secretary under section 1886(j)(2). 

"(2) Provisional period of enhanced oversight for 
new providers and suppliers. — The State complies with pro- 
cedures to provide for a provisional period of enhanced over- 
sight for new providers and suppliers under this title, as estab- 
lished by the Secretary under section 1886(j)(3). 

"(3) Disclosure requirements. — The State requires pro- 
viders and suppliers under the State plan or under a waiver 
of the plan to comply with the disclosure requirements estab- 
lished by the Secretary under section 1886(j)(4). 

"(4) Temporary moratorium on enrollment of new 
providers or suppliers. — 

"(A) Temporary moratorium imposed by the sec- 
retary. — 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), the State 
complies with any temporary moratorium on the en- 
rollment of new providers or suppliers imposed by the 
Secretary under section 1886(j)(6). 

"(ii) Exception. — A State shall not be required to 
comply with a temporary moratorium described in 
clause (i) if the State determines that the imposition 
of such temporary moratorium would adversely impact 
beneficiaries' access to medical assistance. 
"(B) Moratorium on enrollment of providers and 
suppliers. — At the option of the State, the State imposes, 
for purposes of entering into participation agreements with 
providers or suppliers under the State plan or under a 
waiver of the plan, periods of enrollment moratoria, or nu- 
merical caps or other limits, for providers or suppliers 
identified by the Secretary as being at high-risk for fraud, 
waste, or abuse as necessary to combat fraud, waste, or 
abuse, but only if the State determines that the imposition 
of any such period, cap, or other limits would not adversely 
impact beneficiaries' access to medical assistance. 
"(5) Compliance programs. — The State requires providers 
and suppliers under the State plan or under a waiver of the 
plan to establish, in accordance with the requirements of sec- 
tion 1866(j)(7), a compliance program that contains the core 
elements established under subparagraph (B) of that section 
1866(j)(7) for providers or suppliers within a particular indus- 
try or category. 

"(6) Reporting of adverse provider actions. — The State 
complies with the national system for reporting criminal and 
civil convictions, sanctions, negative licensure actions, and 
other adverse provider actions to the Secretary, through the 

June 9, 2010 



691 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6402U128J SSA 



Administrator of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Serv- 
ices, in accordance with regulations of the Secretary. 

"(7) Enrollment and npi of ordering or referring 
providers. — The State requires — 

"(A) all ordering or referring physicians or other pro- 
fessionals to be enrolled under the State plan or under a 
waiver of the plan as a participating provider; and 

"(B) the national provider identifier of any ordering or 
referring physician or other professional to be specified on 
any claim for payment that is based on an order or referral 
of the physician or other professional. 

"(8) Other state oversight. — Nothing in this subsection 
shall be interpreted to preclude or limit the ability of a State 
to engage in provider and supplier screening or enhanced pro- 
vider and supplier oversight activities beyond those required 
by the Secretary.". 

(2) Disclosure of medicare terminated providers and 
suppliers to states. — The Administrator of the Centers for 
Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services shall establish a process for 
making available to the each State agency with responsibility 
for administering a State Medicaid plan (or a waiver of such 
plan) under title XIX of the Social Security Act or a child 
health plan under title XXI the name, national provider identi- 
fier, and other identifying information for any provider of med- 
ical or other items or services or supplier under the Medicare 
program under title XVIII or under the CHIP program under 
title XXI that is terminated from participation under that pro- 
gram within 30 days of the termination (and, with respect to 
all such providers or suppliers who are terminated from the 
Medicare program on the date of enactment of this Act, within 
90 days of such date). 

(3) Conforming amendment. — Section 1902(a)(23) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a), is amended by inserting 
before the semicolon at the end the following: "or by a provider 
or supplier to which a moratorium under subsection (ii)(4) is 
applied during the period of such moratorium". 

(c) CHIP.— Section 2107(e)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397gg(e)(l)), as amended by section 2101(d), is amended — 

(1) by redesignating subparagraphs (D) through (M) as 
subparagraphs (E) through (N), respectively; and 

(2) by inserting after subparagraph (C), the following: 

"(D) Subsections (a)(77) and (ii) of section 1902 (relat- 
ing to provider and supplier screening, oversight, and re- 
porting requirements).". 

SEC. 6402. ENHANCED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID PROGRAM INTEG- 
RITY PROVISIONS. 

(a) In General. — Part A of title XI of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1301 et seq.), as amended by sections 6002, 6004, and 
6102, is amended by inserting after section 11281 the following new 
section: 

"SEC. 1128J [42 U.S.C. 1320a-7k]. MEDICARE AND MEDICAID PROGRAM 
INTEGRITY PROVISIONS. 

"(a) Data Matching. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6402U128J SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



692 



"(1) Integrated data repository. — 
"(A) Inclusion of certain data. — 

"(i) In general. — The Integrated Data Repository 
of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services shall 
include, at a minimum, claims and payment data from 
the following: 

"(I) The programs under titles XVIII and XIX 
(including parts A, B, C, and D of title XVIII). 
"(II) The program under title XXI. 
"(Ill) Health-related programs administered 
by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs. 

"(IV) Health-related programs administered 
by the Secretary of Defense. 

"(V) The program of old-age, survivors, and 
disability insurance benefits established under 
title II. 

"(VI) The Indian Health Service and the Con- 
tract Health Service program, 
"(ii) Priority for inclusion of certain data. — 
Inclusion of the data described in subclause (I) of such 
clause in the Integrated Data Repository shall be a 
priority. Data described in subclauses (II) through (VI) 
of such clause shall be included in the Integrated Data 
Repository as appropriate. 
"(B) Data sharing and matching. — 

"(i) In general. — The Secretary shall enter into 
agreements with the individuals described in clause 
(ii) under which such individuals share and match 
data in the system of records of the respective agen- 
cies of such individuals with data in the system of 
records of the Department of Health and Human Serv- 
ices for the purpose of identifying potential fraud, 
waste, and abuse under the programs under titles 
XVIII and XIX. 

"(ii) Individuals described. — The following indi- 
viduals are described in this clause: 

"(I) The Commissioner of Social Security. 
"(II) The Secretary of Veterans Affairs. 
"(Ill) The Secretary of Defense. 
"(IV) The Director of the Indian Health Serv- 
ice. 

"(hi) Definition of system of records. — For 
purposes of this paragraph, the term 'system of 
records' has the meaning given such term in section 
552a(a)(5) of title 5, United States Code. 
"(2) Access to claims and payment databases. — For pur- 
poses of conducting law enforcement and oversight activities 
and to the extent consistent with applicable information, pri- 
vacy, security, and disclosure laws, including the regulations 
promulgated under the Health Insurance Portability and Ac- 
countability Act of 1996 and section 552a of title 5, United 
States Code, and subject to any information systems security 
requirements under such laws or otherwise required by the 
Secretary, the Inspector General of the Department of Health 

June 9, 2010 



693 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6402U128J SSA 



and Human Services and the Attorney General shall have ac- 
cess to claims and payment data of the Department of Health 
and Human Services and its contractors related to titles XVIII, 
XIX, and XXI. 

"(b) OIG Authority To Obtain Information. — 

"(1) In general. — Notwithstanding and in addition to any 
other provision of law, the Inspector General of the Depart- 
ment of Health and Human Services may, for purposes of pro- 
tecting the integrity of the programs under titles XVIII and 
XIX, obtain information from any individual (including a bene- 
ficiary provided all applicable privacy protections are followed) 
or entity that — 

"(A) is a provider of medical or other items or services, 
supplier, grant recipient, contractor, or subcontractor; or 

"(B) directly or indirectly provides, orders, manufac- 
tures, distributes, arranges for, prescribes, supplies, or re- 
ceives medical or other items or services payable by any 
Federal health care program (as defined in section 
1128B(f)) regardless of how the item or service is paid for, 
or to whom such payment is made. 

"(2) Inclusion of certain information. — Information 
which the Inspector General may obtain under paragraph (1) 
includes any supporting documentation necessary to validate 
claims for payment or payments under title XVIII or XIX, in- 
cluding a prescribing physician's medical records for an indi- 
vidual who is prescribed an item or service which is covered 
under part B of title XVIII, a covered part D drug (as defined 
in section 1860D-2(e)) for which payment is made under an 
MA-PD plan under part C of such title, or a prescription drug 
plan under part D of such title, and any records necessary for 
evaluation of the economy, efficiency, and effectiveness of the 
programs under titles XVIII and XIX. 

"(c) Administrative Remedy for Knowing Participation by 
Beneficiary in Health Care Fraud Scheme. — 

"(1) In general. — In addition to any other applicable rem- 
edies, if an applicable individual has knowingly participated in 
a Federal health care fraud offense or a conspiracy to commit 
a Federal health care fraud offense, the Secretary shall impose 
an appropriate administrative penalty commensurate with the 
offense or conspiracy. 

"(2) Applicable individual. — For purposes of paragraph 
(1), the term 'applicable individual' means an individual — 

"(A) entitled to, or enrolled for, benefits under part A 
of title XVIII or enrolled under part B of such title; 

"(B) eligible for medical assistance under a State plan 
under title XIX or under a waiver of such plan; or 

"(C) eligible for child health assistance under a child 
health plan under title XXI. 
"(d) Reporting and Returning of Overpayments. — 

"(1) In general. — If a person has received an overpay- 
ment, the person shall — 

"(A) report and return the overpayment to the Sec- 
retary, the State, an intermediary, a carrier, or a con- 
tractor, as appropriate, at the correct address; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6402 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



694 



"(B) notify the Secretary, State, intermediary, carrier, 
or contractor to whom the overpayment was returned in 
writing of the reason for the overpayment. 
"(2) Deadline for reporting and returning overpay- 
ments. — An overpayment must be reported and returned 
under paragraph (1) by the later of — 

"(A) the date which is 60 days after the date on which 
the overpayment was identified; or 

"(B) the date any corresponding cost report is due, if 
applicable. 

"(3) Enforcement. — Any overpayment retained by a per- 
son after the deadline for reporting and returning the overpay- 
ment under paragraph (2) is an obligation (as defined in sec- 
tion 3729(b)(3) of title 31, United States Code) for purposes of 
section 3729 of such title. 

"(4) Definitions. — In this subsection: 

"(A) Knowing and knowingly. — The terms 'knowing' 
and 'knowingly' have the meaning given those terms in 
section 3729(b) of title 31, United States Code. 

"(B) Overpayment. — The term "overpayment" means 
any funds that a person receives or retains under title 
XVIII or XIX to which the person, after applicable rec- 
onciliation, is not entitled under such title. 
"(C) Person.— 

"(i) In general. — The term 'person' means a pro- 
vider of services, supplier, medicaid managed care or- 
ganization (as defined in section 1903(m)(l)(A)), Medi- 
care Advantage organization (as defined in section 
1859(a)(1)), or PDP sponsor (as defined in section 
1860D-41(a)(13)). 

"(ii) Exclusion. — Such term does not include a 
beneficiary. 

"(e) Inclusion of National Provider Identifier on All Ap- 
plications and Claims. — The Secretary shall promulgate a regula- 
tion that requires, not later than January 1, 2011, all providers of 
medical or other items or services and suppliers under the pro- 
grams under titles XVIII and XIX that qualify for a national pro- 
vider identifier to include their national provider identifier on all 
applications to enroll in such programs and on all claims for pay- 
ment submitted under such programs.", 
(b) Access to Data — 

(1) Medicare part d.— Section 1860D-15(f)(2) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-116(f)(2)) is amended by 
striking "may be used by" and all that follows through the pe- 
riod at the end and inserting "may be used — 

"(A) by officers, employees, and contractors of the De- 
partment of Health and Human Services for the purposes 
of, and to the extent necessary in — 

"(i) carrying out this section; and 
"(ii) conducting oversight, evaluation, and enforce- 
ment under this title; and 

"(B) by the Attorney General and the Comptroller 
General of the United States for the purposes of, and to 

June 9, 2010 



695 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6402 



the extent necessary in, carrying out health oversight ac- 
tivities.". 

(2) Data matching.— Section 552a(a)(8)(B) of title 5, 
United States Code, is amended — 

(A) in clause (vii), by striking "or" at the end; 

(B) in clause (viii), by inserting "or" after the semi- 
colon; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following new clause: 
"(ix) matches performed by the Secretary of 

Health and Human Services or the Inspector General 
of the Department of Health and Human Services 
with respect to potential fraud, waste, and abuse, in- 
cluding matches of a system of records with non-Fed- 
eral records;". 

(3) Matching agreements with the commissioner of 
social security. — Section 205(r) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 405(r)) is amended by adding at the end the following 
new paragraph: 

"(9)(A) The Commissioner of Social Security shall, upon 
the request of the Secretary or the Inspector General of the De- 
partment of Health and Human Services — 

"(i) enter into an agreement with the Secretary or 
such Inspector General for the purpose of matching data 
in the system of records of the Social Security Administra- 
tion and the system of records of the Department of Health 
and Human Services; and 

"(ii) include in such agreement safeguards to assure 
the maintenance of the confidentiality of any information 
disclosed. 

"(B) For purposes of this paragraph, the term 'system of 
records' has the meaning given such term in section 552a(a)(5) 
of title 5, United States Code.". 

(c) Withholding of Federal Matching Payments for 
States That Fail To Report Enrollee Encounter Data in the 
Medicaid Statistical Information System. — Section 1903(i) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(i)) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (23), by striking "or" at the end; 

(2) in paragraph (24), by striking the period at the end and 
inserting "; or"; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:. 

"(25) with respect to any amounts expended for medical as- 
sistance for individuals for whom the State does not report en- 
rollee encounter data (as defined by the Secretary) to the Med- 
icaid Statistical Information System (MSIS) in a timely man- 
ner (as determined by the Secretary).". 

(d) Permissive Exclusions and Civil Monetary Pen- 
alties. — 

(1) Permissive exclusions. — Section 1128(b) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7(b)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new paragraph: 

"(16) Making false statements or misrepresentation 
of material facts. — Any individual or entity that knowingly 
makes or causes to be made any false statement, omission, or 
misrepresentation of a material fact in any application, agree- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6402 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



696 



ment, bid, or contract to participate or enroll as a provider of 
services or supplier under a Federal health care program (as 
defined in section 1128B(f)), including Medicare Advantage or- 
ganizations under part C of title XVIII, prescription drug plan 
sponsors under part D of title XVIII, medicaid managed care 
organizations under title XIX, and entities that apply to par- 
ticipate as providers of services or suppliers in such managed 
care organizations and such plans.". 
(2) Civil monetary penalties. — 

(A) In general. — Section 1128A(a) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a(a)) is amended— 

(i) in paragraph (1)(D), by striking "was excluded" 
and all that follows through the period at the end and 
inserting "was excluded from the Federal health care 
program (as defined in section 1128B(f)) under which 
the claim was made pursuant to Federal law."; 

(ii) in paragraph (6), by striking "or" at the end; 

(iii) by inserting after paragraph (7), the following 
new paragraphs: 

"(8) orders or prescribes a medical or other item or service 
during a period in which the person was excluded from a Fed- 
eral health care program (as so defined), in the case where the 
person knows or should know that a claim for such medical or 
other item or service will be made under such a program; 

"(9) knowingly makes or causes to be made any false state- 
ment, omission, or misrepresentation of a material fact in any 
application, bid, or contract to participate or enroll as a pro- 
vider of services or a supplier under a Federal health care pro- 
gram (as so defined), including Medicare Advantage organiza- 
tions under part C of title XVIII, prescription drug plan spon- 
sors under part D of title XVIII, medicaid managed care orga- 
nizations under title XIX, and entities that apply to participate 
as providers of services or suppliers in such managed care or- 
ganizations and such plans; 

"(10) knows of an overpayment (as defined in paragraph 
(4) of section 1128J(d)) and does not report and return the 
overpayment in accordance with such section;"; 

(iv) in the first sentence — 

(I) by striking the "or" after "prohibited rela- 
tionship occurs;"; and 

(II) by striking "act)" and inserting "act; or in 
cases under paragraph (9), $50,000 for each false 
statement or misrepresentation of a material 
fact)"; and 

(v) in the second sentence, by striking "purpose)" 
and inserting "purpose; or in cases under paragraph 
(9), an assessment of not more than 3 times the total 
amount claimed for each item or service for which pay- 
ment was made based upon the application containing 
the false statement or misrepresentation of a material 
fact)". 

(B) Clarification of treatment of certain chari- 
table and other innocuous programs. — Section 

June 9, 2010 



697 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6402 



1128A(i)(6) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a- 
7a(i)(6)) is amended — 

(i) in subparagraph (C), by striking "or" at the 

end; 

(ii) in subparagraph (D), as redesignated by sec- 
tion 4331(e) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Pub- 
lic Law 105-33), by striking the period at the end and 
inserting a semicolon; 

(hi) by redesignating subparagraph (D), as added 
by section 4523(c) of such Act, as subparagraph (E) 
and striking the period at the end and inserting "; or"; 
and 

(iv) by adding at the end the following new sub- 
paragraphs: 

"(F) any other remuneration which promotes access to 
care and poses a low risk of harm to patients and Federal 
health care programs (as defined in section 1128B(f) and 
designated by the Secretary under regulations); 

"(G) the offer or transfer of items or services for free 
or less than fair market value by a person, if — 

"(i) the items or services consist of coupons, re- 
bates, or other rewards from a retailer; 

"(ii) the items or services are offered or trans- 
ferred on equal terms available to the general public, 
regardless of health insurance status; and 

"(hi) the offer or transfer of the items or services 
is not tied to the provision of other items or services 
reimbursed in whole or in part by the program under 
title XVIII or a State health care program (as defined 
in section 1128(h)); 

"(H) the offer or transfer of items or services for free 
or less than fair market value by a person, if — 

"(i) the items or services are not offered as part of 
any advertisement or solicitation; 

"(ii) the items or services are not tied to the provi- 
sion of other services reimbursed in whole or in part 
by the program under title XVIII or a State health 
care program (as so defined); 

"(hi) there is a reasonable connection between the 
items or services and the medical care of the indi- 
vidual; and 

"(iv) the person provides the items or services 
after determining in good faith that the individual is 
in financial need; or 

"(I) effective on a date specified by the Secretary (but 
not earlier than January 1, 2011), the waiver by a PDP 
sponsor of a prescription drug plan under part D of title 
XVIII or an MA organization offering an MA-PD plan 
under part C of such title of any copayment for the first 
fill of a covered part D drug (as defined in section 1860D- 
2(e)) that is a generic drug for individuals enrolled in the 
prescription drug plan or MA-PD plan, respectively.", 
(e) Testimonial Subpoena Authority in Exclusion-only 
Cases.— Section 1128(f) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6402 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



698 



1320a-7(f)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph: 

"(4) The provisions of subsections (d) and (e) of section 205 
shall apply with respect to this section to the same extent as 
they are applicable with respect to title II. The Secretary may 
delegate the authority granted by section 205(d) (as made ap- 
plicable to this section) to the Inspector General of the Depart- 
ment of Health and Human Services for purposes of any inves- 
tigation under this section.". 

(f) Health Care Fraud. — 

(1) Kickbacks. — Section 1128B of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1320a-7b) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new subsection: 

"(g) In addition to the penalties provided for in this section or 
section 1128A, a claim that includes items or services resulting 
from a violation of this section constitutes a false or fraudulent 
claim for purposes of subchapter III of chapter 37 of title 31, 
United States Code.". 

(2) Revising the intent requirement. — Section 1128B of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7b), as amended by 
paragraph (1), is amended by adding at the end the following 
new subsection: 

"(h) With respect to violations of this section, a person need not 
have actual knowledge of this section or specific intent to commit 
a violation of this section.". 

(g) Surety Bond Requirements. — 

(1) Durable medical equipment. — Section 1834(a)(16)(B) 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(16)(B)) is 
amended by inserting "that the Secretary determines is com- 
mensurate with the volume of the billing of the supplier" be- 
fore the period at the end. 

(2) Home health agencies— Section 1861(o)(7)(C) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(o)(7)(C)) is amended by in- 
serting "that the Secretary determines is commensurate with 
the volume of the billing of the home health agency" before the 
semicolon at the end. 

(3) Requirements for certain other providers of serv- 
ices and suppliers. — Section 1862 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395y) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new subsection: 

"(n) Requirement of a Surety Bond for Certain Providers 
of Services and Suppliers. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary may require a provider of 
services or supplier described in paragraph (2) to provide the 
Secretary on a continuing basis with a surety bond in a form 
specified by the Secretary in an amount (not less than $50,000) 
that the Secretary determines is commensurate with the vol- 
ume of the billing of the provider of services or supplier. The 
Secretary may waive the requirement of a bond under the pre- 
ceding sentence in the case of a provider of services or supplier 
that provides a comparable surety bond under State law. 

"(2) Provider of services or supplier described. — A 
provider of services or supplier described in this paragraph is 
a provider of services or supplier the Secretary determines ap- 

June 9, 2010 



699 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6402 



propriate based on the level of risk involved with respect to the 
provider of services or supplier, and consistent with the surety 
bond requirements under sections 1834(a)(16)(B) and 
1861(0X7X0).". 

(h) Suspension of Medicare and Medicaid Payments Pend- 
ing Investigation of Credible Allegations of Fraud. — 

(1) Medicare.— Section 1862 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395y), as amended by subsection (g)(3), is amended by 
adding at the end the following new subsection: 

"(o) Suspension of Payments Pending Investigation of 
Credible Allegations of Fraud. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary may suspend payments 
to a provider of services or supplier under this title pending an 
investigation of a credible allegation of fraud against the pro- 
vider of services or supplier, unless the Secretary determines 
there is good cause not to suspend such payments. 

"(2) Consultation. — The Secretary shall consult with the 
Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human 
Services in determining whether there is a credible allegation 
of fraud against a provider of services or supplier. 

"(3) Promulgation of regulations. — The Secretary shall 
promulgate regulations to carry out this subsection and section 
1903(i)(2)(C).". 

(2) Medicaid.— Section 1903(i)(2) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396b(i)(2)) is amended— 

(A) in subparagraph (A), by striking "or" at the end; 

and 

(B) by inserting after subparagraph (B), the following: 
"(C) by any individual or entity to whom the State has 

failed to suspend payments under the plan during any pe- 
riod when there is pending an investigation of a credible 
allegation of fraud against the individual or entity, as de- 
termined by the State in accordance with regulations pro- 
mulgated by the Secretary for purposes of section 1862(o) 
and this subparagraph, unless the State determines in ac- 
cordance with such regulations there is good cause not to 
suspend such payments; or". 

(i) Increased Funding To Fight Fraud and Abuse. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1817(k) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395i(k)) is amended— 

(A) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 

"(7) Additional funding. — In addition to the funds other- 
wise appropriated to the Account from the Trust Fund under 
paragraphs (3) and (4) and for purposes described in para- 
graphs (3)(C) and (4)(A), there are hereby appropriated an ad- 
ditional $10,000,000 to such Account from such Trust Fund for 
each of fiscal years 2011 through 2020. The funds appropriated 
under this paragraph shall be allocated in the same proportion 
as the total funding appropriated with respect to paragraphs 
(3)(A) and (4)(A) was allocated with respect to fiscal year 2010, 
and shall be available without further appropriation until ex- 
pended. 

[Additional paragraph (8), providing additional funding, 
added by section 1303(a)(1)(A) of HCERA; text shown below\ 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6402 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



700 



["(8) Additional funding. — ] 

["(A) In general. — In addition to the funds otherwise 
appropriated to the Account from the Trust Fund under 
paragraphs (3)(C) and (4)(A) and for purposes described in 
paragraphs (3)(C) and (4)(A), there are hereby appro- 
priated to such Account from such Trust Fund the fol- 
lowing additional amounts:] 

Hi) For fiscal year 2011, $95,000,000.] 
["(ii) For fiscal year 2012, $55,000,000.] 
["(hi) For each of fiscal years 2013 and 2014, 
$30,000,000.] 

["(iv) For each of fiscal years 2015 and 2016, 
$20,000,000.] 

["(B) Allocation. — The funds appropriated under 
this paragraph shall be allocated in the same proportion as 
the total funding appropriated with respect to paragraphs 
(3)(A) and (4)(A) was allocated with respect to fiscal year 
2010, and shall be available without further appropriation 
until expended."; and] 

(B) in paragraph (4)(A), by inserting "until expended" 
after "appropriation". [Note: additional amendment made 
to paragraph (4)(A) by section 1303(a)(1)(B) ofHCERA] 
(2) Indexing of amounts appropriated. — 

(A) Departments of health and human services 
and justice. — Section 1817(k)(3)(A)(i) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i(k)(3)(A)(i)) is amended— 

(i) in subclause (III), by inserting "and" at the end; 

(ii) in subclause (IV) — 

(I) by striking "for each of fiscal years 2007, 

2008, 2009, and 2010" and inserting "for each fis- 
cal year after fiscal year 2006"; and 

(II) by striking "; and" and inserting a period; 

and 

(iii) by striking subclause (V). 

(B) Office of the inspector general of the de- 
partment OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES. — Section 
1817(k)(3)(A)(ii) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i(k)(3)(A)(ii)) is 
amended — 

(i) in subclause (VIII), by inserting "and" at the 

end; 

(ii) in subclause (IX) — 

(I) by striking "for each of fiscal years 2008, 

2009, and 2010" and inserting "for each fiscal year 
after fiscal year 2007"; and 

(II) by striking "; and" and inserting a period; 

and 

(iii) by striking subclause (X). 

(C) Federal bureau of investigation. — Section 
1817(kX3XB) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395i(kX3XB)) is amended— 

(i) in clause (vii), by inserting "and" at the end; 

(ii) in clause (viii) — 

June 9, 2010 



701 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6402 



(I) by striking "for each of fiscal years 2007, 
2008, 2009, and 2010" and inserting "for each fis- 
cal year after fiscal year 2006"; and 

(II) by striking "; and" and inserting a period; 

and 

(iii) by striking clause (ix). 
(D) Medicare integrity program. — Section 
1817(k)(4)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395i(k)(4)(C)) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new clause: 

"(ii) For each fiscal year after 2010, by the per- 
centage increase in the consumer price index for all 
urban consumers (all items; United States city aver- 
age) over the previous year.", 
(j) Medicare Integrity Program and Medicaid Integrity 
Program. — 

(1) Medicare integrity program. — 

(A) Requirement to provide performance statis- 
tics.— Section 1893(c) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395ddd(c)) is amended — 

(i) in paragraph (3), by striking "and" at the end; 

(ii) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph 
(5); and 

(iii) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following 
new paragraph: 

"(4) the entity agrees to provide the Secretary and the In- 
spector General of the Department of Health and Human Serv- 
ices with such performance statistics (including the number 
and amount of overpayments recovered, the number of fraud 
referrals, and the return on investment of such activities by 
the entity) as the Secretary or the Inspector General may re- 
quest; and". 

(B) Evaluations and annual report. — Section 1893 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ddd) is amended 
by adding at the end the following new subsection: 

"(i) Evaluations and Annual Report. — 

"(1) Evaluations. — The Secretary shall conduct evalua- 
tions of eligible entities which the Secretary contracts with 
under the Program not less frequently than every 3 years. 

"(2) Annual report. — Not later than 180 days after the 
end of each fiscal year (beginning with fiscal year 2011), the 
Secretary shall submit a report to Congress which identifies — 
"(A) the use of funds, including funds transferred from 
the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under section 
1817 and the Federal Supplementary Insurance Trust 
Fund under section 1841, to carry out this section; and 
"(B) the effectiveness of the use of such funds.". 

(C) Flexibility in pursuing fraud and abuse. — Sec- 
tion 1893(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395ddd(a)) is amended by inserting ", or otherwise," after 
"entities". 

(2) Medicaid integrity program. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6403 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



702 



(A) Requirement to provide performance statis- 
tics.— Section 1936(c)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396u-6(c)(2)) is amended— 

(i) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subpara- 
graph (E); and 

(ii) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the fol- 
lowing new subparagraph: 

"(D) The entity agrees to provide the Secretary and 
the Inspector General of the Department of Health and 
Human Services with such performance statistics (includ- 
ing the number and amount of overpayments recovered, 
the number of fraud referrals, and the return on invest- 
ment of such activities by the entity) as the Secretary or 
the Inspector General may request.". 

(B) Evaluations and annual report. — Section 
1936(e) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-7(e)) is 
amended — 

(i) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph 
(5); and 

(ii) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following 
new paragraph: 

"(4) Evaluations. — The Secretary shall conduct evalua- 
tions of eligible entities which the Secretary contracts with 
under the Program not less frequently than every 3 years.". 
[Additional amendments to section 1936(e)(1) made by section 
1303(b) ofHCERA, p. 9451 

(k) Expanded Application of Hardship Waivers for Exclu- 
sions.— Section 1128(c)(3)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1320a-7(c)(3)(B)) is amended by striking "individuals entitled to 
benefits under part A of title XVIII or enrolled under part B of 
such title, or both" and inserting "beneficiaries (as defined in sec- 
tion 1128A(i)(5)) of that program". 

SEC. 6403. ELIMINATION OF DUPLICATION BETWEEN THE 

healthcare integrity and protection data BANK 
and the national practitioner data bank. 

(a) Information Reported by Federal Agencies and 
Health Plans. — Section 1128E of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1320a-7e) is amended— 

(1) by striking subsection (a) and inserting the following: 
"(a) In General. — The Secretary shall maintain a national 

health care fraud and abuse data collection program under this sec- 
tion for the reporting of certain final adverse actions (not including 
settlements in which no findings of liability have been made) 
against health care providers, suppliers, or practitioners as re- 
quired by subsection (b), with access as set forth in subsection (d), 
and shall furnish the information collected under this section to the 
National Practitioner Data Bank established pursuant to the 
Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11101 et 
seq.)."; 

(2) by striking subsection (d) and inserting the following: 
"(d) Access to Reported Information. — 

"(1) Availability. — The information collected under this 
section shall be available from the National Practitioner Data 
Bank to the agencies, authorities, and officials which are pro- 
June 9, 2010 



703 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6403 



vided under section 1921(b) information reported under section 
1921(a). 

"(2) Fees for disclosure. — The Secretary may establish 
or approve reasonable fees for the disclosure of information 
under this section. The amount of such a fee may not exceed 
the costs of processing the requests for disclosure and of pro- 
viding such information. Such fees shall be available to the 
Secretary to cover such costs."; 

(3) by striking subsection (f) and inserting the following: 
"(f) Appropriate Coordination. — In implementing this sec- 
tion, the Secretary shall provide for the maximum appropriate co- 
ordination with part B of the Health Care Quality Improvement 
Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11131 et seq.) and section 1921."; and 

(4) in subsection (g) — 

(A) in paragraph (1)(A) — 

(i) in clause (hi) — 

(I) by striking "or State" each place it ap- 
pears; 

(II) by redesignating subclauses (II) and (III) 
as subclauses (III) and (IV), respectively; and 

(III) by inserting after subclause (I) the fol- 
lowing new subclause: 

"(II) any dismissal or closure of the pro- 
ceedings by reason of the provider, supplier, or 
practitioner surrendering their license or leaving 
the State or jurisdiction"; and 

(ii) by striking clause (iv) and inserting the fol- 
lowing: 

"(iv) Exclusion from participation in a Federal 
health care program (as defined in section 1128B(f))."; 

(B) in paragraph (3) — 

(i) by striking subparagraphs (D) and (E); and 

(ii) by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subpara- 
graph (D); and 

(C) in subparagraph (D) (as so redesignated), by strik- 
ing "or State". 

(b) Information Reported by State Law or Fraud En- 
forcement Agencies. — Section 1921 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396r-2) is amended— 
(1) in subsection (a) — 

(A) in paragraph (1) — 

(i) by striking "system— The State" and all that 
follows through the semicolon and inserting SYSTEM. — 
"(A) Licensing or certification actions. — The State 

must have in effect a system of reporting the following in- 
formation with respect to formal proceedings (as defined 
by the Secretary in regulations) concluded against a health 
care practitioner or entity by a State licensing or certifi- 
cation agency:"; 

(ii) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) through 

(D) as clauses (i) through (iv), respectively, and indent- 
ing appropriately; 

(iii) in subparagraph (A)(iii) (as so redesignated) — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6403 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



704 



(I) by striking "the license of and inserting 
"license or the right to apply for, or renew, a li- 
cense by"; and 

(II) by inserting "nonrenewability," after "vol- 
untary surrender,"; and 

(iv) by adding at the end the following new sub- 
paragraph: 

"(B) Other final adverse actions. — The State must 
have in effect a system of reporting information with re- 
spect to any final adverse action (not including settlements 
in which no findings of liability have been made) taken 
against a health care provider, supplier, or practitioner by 
a State law or fraud enforcement agency."; and 

(B) in paragraph (2), by striking "the authority de- 
scribed in paragraph (1)" and inserting "a State licensing 
or certification agency or State law or fraud enforcement 
agency"; 

(2) in subsection (b) — 

(A) by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the fol- 
lowing: 

"(2) to State licensing or certification agencies and Federal 
agencies responsible for the licensing and certification of health 
care providers, suppliers, and licensed health care practi- 
tioners;"; 

(B) in each of paragraphs (4) and (6), by inserting ", 
but only with respect to information provided pursuant to 
subsection (a)(1)(A)" before the comma at the end; 

(C) by striking paragraph (5) and inserting the fol- 
lowing: 

"(5) to State law or fraud enforcement agencies,"; 

(D) by redesignating paragraphs (7) and (8) as para- 
graphs (8) and (9), respectively; and 

(E) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new 
paragraph: 

"(7) to health plans (as defined in section 1128C(c));"; 

(3) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (h), and 
by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsections: 
"(d) Disclosure and Correction of Information. — 

"(1) Disclosure. — With respect to information reported 
pursuant to subsection (a)(1), the Secretary shall — 

"(A) provide for disclosure of the information, upon re- 
quest, to the health care practitioner who, or the entity 
that, is the subject of the information reported; and 

"(B) establish procedures for the case where the health 
care practitioner or entity disputes the accuracy of the in- 
formation reported. 

"(2) Corrections. — Each State licensing or certification 
agency and State law or fraud enforcement agency shall report 
corrections of information already reported about any formal 
proceeding or final adverse action described in subsection (a), 
in such form and manner as the Secretary prescribes by regu- 
lation. 

"(e) Fees for Disclosure. — The Secretary may establish or 
approve reasonable fees for the disclosure of information under this 

June 9, 2010 



705 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6403 



section. The amount of such a fee may not exceed the costs of proc- 
essing the requests for disclosure and of providing such informa- 
tion. Such fees shall be available to the Secretary to cover such 
costs. 

"(f) Protection From Liability for Reporting. — No person 
or entity, including any agency designated by the Secretary in sub- 
section (b), shall be held liable in any civil action with respect to 
any reporting of information as required under this section, with- 
out knowledge of the falsity of the information contained in the re- 
port. 

"(g) References. — For purposes of this section: 

"(1) State licensing or certification agency. — The 
term 'State licensing or certification agency' includes any au- 
thority of a State (or of a political subdivision thereof) respon- 
sible for the licensing of health care practitioners (or any peer 
review organization or private accreditation entity reviewing 
the services provided by health care practitioners) or entities. 

"(2) State law or fraud enforcement agency. — The 
term 'State law or fraud enforcement agency' includes — 
"(A) a State law enforcement agency; and 
"(B) a State medicaid fraud control unit (as defined in 
section 1903(q)). 
"(3) Final adverse action. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
term 'final adverse action' includes — 

"(i) civil judgments against a health care provider, 
supplier, or practitioner in State court related to the 
delivery of a health care item or service; 

"(ii) State criminal convictions related to the deliv- 
ery of a health care item or service; 

"(hi) exclusion from participation in State health 
care programs (as defined in section 1128(h)); 

"(iv) any licensing or certification action described 
in subsection (a)(1)(A) taken against a supplier by a 
State licensing or certification agency; and 

"(v) any other adjudicated actions or decisions 
that the Secretary shall establish by regulation. 
"(B) Exception. — Such term does not include any ac- 
tion with respect to a malpractice claim."; and 
(4) in subsection (h), as so redesignated, by striking "The 
Secretary" and all that follows through the period at the end 
and inserting "In implementing this section, the Secretary 
shall provide for the maximum appropriate coordination with 
part B of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 
(42 U.S.C. 11131 et seq.) and section 1128E.". 

(c) Conforming Amendment. — Section 1128C(a)(l) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7c(a)(l)) is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (C), by adding "and" after the comma 
at the end; 

(2) in subparagraph (D), by striking ", and" and inserting 
a period; and 

(3) by striking subparagraph (E). 

(d) Transition Process; Effective Date. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6403 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



706 



(1) In general. — Effective on the date of enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this sec- 
tion referred to as the "Secretary") shall implement a transi- 
tion process under which, by not later than the end of the tran- 
sition period described in paragraph (5), the Secretary shall 
cease operating the Healthcare Integrity and Protection Data 
Bank established under section 1128E of the Social Security 
Act (as in effect before the effective date specified in paragraph 
(6)) and shall transfer all data collected in the Healthcare In- 
tegrity and Protection Data Bank to the National Practitioner 
Data Bank established pursuant to the Health Care Quality 
Improvement Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11101 et seq.). During 
such transition process, the Secretary shall have in effect ap- 
propriate procedures to ensure that data collection and access 
to the Healthcare Integrity and Protection Data Bank and the 
National Practitioner Data Bank are not disrupted. 

(2) Regulations. — The Secretary shall promulgate regula- 
tions to carry out the amendments made by subsections (a) and 
(b). 

(3) Funding. — 

(A) Availability of fees. — Fees collected pursuant to 
section 1128E(d)(2) of the Social Security Act prior to the 
effective date specified in paragraph (6) for the disclosure 
of information in the Healthcare Integrity and Protection 
Data Bank shall be available to the Secretary, without fis- 
cal year limitation, for payment of costs related to the 
transition process described in paragraph (1). Any such 
fees remaining after the transition period is complete shall 
be available to the Secretary, without fiscal year limita- 
tion, for payment of the costs of operating the National 
Practitioner Data Bank. 

(B) Availability of additional funds. — In addition 
to the fees described in subparagraph (A), any funds avail- 
able to the Secretary or to the Inspector General of the De- 
partment of Health and Human Services for a purpose re- 
lated to combating health care fraud, waste, or abuse shall 
be available to the extent necessary for operating the 
Healthcare Integrity and Protection Data Bank during the 
transition period, including systems testing and other ac- 
tivities necessary to ensure that information formerly re- 
ported to the Healthcare Integrity and Protection Data 
Bank will be accessible through the National Practitioner 
Data Bank after the end of such transition period. 

(4) Special provision for access to the national prac- 
titioner DATA BANK BY THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AF- 
FAIRS. — 

(A) In general. — Notwithstanding any other provision 
of law, during the 1-year period that begins on the effec- 
tive date specified in paragraph (6), the information de- 
scribed in subparagraph (B) shall be available from the 
National Practitioner Data Bank to the Secretary of Vet- 
erans Affairs without charge. 

(B) Information described. — For purposes of sub- 
paragraph (A), the information described in this subpara- 

June 9, 2010 



707 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6404 



graph is the information that would, but for the amend- 
ments made by this section, have been available to the 
Secretary of Veterans Affairs from the Healthcare Integ- 
rity and Protection Data Bank. 

(5) Transition period defined. — For purposes of this sub- 
section, the term "transition period" means the period that be- 
gins on the date of enactment of this Act and ends on the later 
of— 

(A) the date that is 1 year after such date of enact- 
ment; or 

(B) the effective date of the regulations promulgated 
under paragraph (2). 

(6) Effective date. — The amendments made by sub- 
sections (a), (b), and (c) shall take effect on the first day after 
the final day of the transition period. 

SEC. 6404. MAXIMUM PERIOD FOR SUBMISSION OF MEDICARE CLAIMS 
REDUCED TO NOT MORE THAN 12 MONTHS. 

(a) Reducing Maximum Period for Submission. — 

(1) Part a.— Section 1814(a) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395f(a)(D) is amended— 

(A) in paragraph (1), by striking "period of 3 calendar 
years" and all that follows through the semicolon and in- 
serting "period ending 1 calendar year after the date of 
service;"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new sentence: 
"In applying paragraph (1), the Secretary may specify ex- 
ceptions to the 1 calendar year period specified in such 
paragraph." 

(2) Part b.— 

(A) Section 1842(b)(3) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395u(b)(3)(B)) is amended— 

(i) in subparagraph (B), in the flush language fol- 
lowing clause (ii), by striking "close of the calendar 
year following the year in which such service is fur- 
nished (deeming any service furnished in the last 3 
months of any calendar year to have been furnished in 
the succeeding calendar year)" and inserting "period 
ending 1 calendar year after the date of service"; and 

(ii) by adding at the end the following new sen- 
tence: "In applying subparagraph (B), the Secretary 
may specify exceptions to the 1 calendar year period 
specified in such subparagraph." 

(B) Section 1835(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395n(a)) is 
amended — 

(i) in paragraph (1), by striking "period of 3 cal- 
endar years" and all that follows through the semi- 
colon and inserting "period ending 1 calendar year 
after the date of service;"; and 

(ii) by adding at the end the following new sen- 
tence: "In applying paragraph (1), the Secretary may 
specify exceptions to the 1 calendar year period speci- 
fied in such paragraph." 

(b) Effective Date. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6405 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



708 



(1) In general. — The amendments made by subsection (a) 
shall apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 2010. 

(2) Services furnished before 2010. — In the case of serv- 
ices furnished before January 1, 2010, a bill or request for pay- 
ment under section 1814(a)(1), 1842(b)(3)(B), or 1835(a) shall 
be filed not later that December 31, 2010. 

SEC. 6405. PHYSICIANS WHO ORDER ITEMS OR SERVICES REQUIRED 
TO BE MEDICARE ENROLLED PHYSICIANS OR ELIGIBLE 
PROFESSIONALS. 

(a) DME.— Section 1834(a)(ll)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395m(a)(ll)(B)) is amended by striking "physician" and in- 
serting "physician enrolled under section 1866(j) or an eligible pro- 
fessional under section 1848(k)(3)(B) that is enrolled under section 
1866(j)". 

(b) Home Health Services. — [Replaced by section 10603] 

(1) Part a.— Section 1814(a)(2) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395(a)(2)) is amended in the matter preceding sub- 
paragraph (A) by inserting ", or, in the case of services de- 
scribed in subparagraph (C), a physician enrolled under section 
1866(j)," after "in collaboration with a physician,". 

(2) Part b.— Section 1835(a)(2) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395n(a)(2)) is amended in the matter preceding 
subparagraph (A) by inserting ", or, in the case of services de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A), a physician enrolled under section 
1866(j)," after "a physician". 

(c) Application to Other Items or Services. — The Secretary 
may extend the requirement applied by the amendments made by 
subsections (a) and (b) to durable medical equipment and home 
health services (relating to requiring certifications and written or- 
ders to be made by enrolled physicians and health professions) to 
all other categories of items or services under title XVIII of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.), including covered part D 
drugs as defined in section 1860D-2(e) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395w-102), that are ordered, prescribed, or referred by a physi- 
cian enrolled under section 1866(j) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(j)) 
or an eligible professional under section 1848(k)(3)(B) of such Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(k)(3)(B)). 

(d) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to written orders and certifications made on or after 
July 1, 2010. 

SEC. 6406. REQUIREMENT FOR PHYSICIANS TO PROVIDE DOCUMENTA- 
TION ON REFERRALS TO PROGRAMS AT HIGH RISK OF 
WASTE AND ABUSE. 

(a) Physicians and Other Suppliers. — Section 1842(h) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395u(h)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new paragraph: 

"(9) The Secretary may revoke enrollment, for a period of not 
more than one year for each act, for a physician or supplier under 
section 1866(j) if such physician or supplier fails to maintain and, 
upon request of the Secretary, provide access to documentation re- 
lating to written orders or requests for payment for durable med- 
ical equipment, certifications for home health services, or referrals 
for other items or services written or ordered by such physician or 
supplier under this title, as specified by the Secretary.". 

June 9, 2010 



709 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6407 



(b) Providers of Services. — Section 1866(a)(1) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395cc) is further amended — 

(1) in subparagraph (U), by striking at the end "and"; 

(2) in subparagraph (V), by striking the period at the end 
and adding "; and"; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: 

"(W) maintain and, upon request of the Secretary, pro- 
vide access to documentation relating to written orders or 
requests for payment for durable medical equipment, cer- 
tifications for home health services, or referrals for other 
items or services written or ordered by the provider under 
this title, as specified by the Secretary.". 

(c) OIG Permissive Exclusion Authority. — Section 
1128(b)(ll) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7(b)(ll)) is 
amended by inserting ", ordering, referring for furnishing, or certi- 
fying the need for" after "furnishing". 

(d) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to orders, certifications, and referrals made on or after 
January 1, 2010. 

SEC. 6407. FACE TO FACE ENCOUNTER WITH PATIENT REQUIRED BE- 
FORE PHYSICIANS MAY CERTIFY ELIGIBILITY FOR HOME 
HEALTH SERVICES OR DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT 
UNDER MEDICARE. 

(a) Condition of Payment for Home Health Services. — 

(1) Part a. — Section 1814(a)(2)(C) of such Act is amend- 
ed— 

(A) by striking "and such services" and inserting "such 
services"; and 

(B) by inserting after "care of a physician" the fol- 
lowing: ", and, in the case of a certification made by a phy- 
sician after January 1, 2010, prior to making such certifi- 
cation the physician must document that the physician 
himself or herself, or a nurse practitioner or clinical nurse 
specialist (as those terms are defined in section 
1861(aa)(5)) who is working in collaboration with the phy- 
sician in accordance with State law, or a certified nurse- 
midwife (as defined in section 1861(gg)) as authorized by 
State law, or a physician assistant (as denned in section 
1861(aa)(5)) under the supervision of the physician, has 
had a face-to-face encounter (including through use of tele- 
health, subject to the requirements in section 1834(m), and 
other than with respect to encounters that are incident to 
services involved) with the individual within a reasonable 
timeframe as determined by the Secretary". [As revised by 
section 10605(a)] 

(2) Part b.— Section 1835(a)(2)(A) of the Social Security 
Act is amended — 

(A) by striking "and" before "(hi)"; and 

(B) by inserting after "care of a physician" the fol- 
lowing: ", and (iv) in the case of a certification after Janu- 
ary 1, 2010, prior to making such certification the physi- 
cian must document that the physician, or a nurse practi- 
tioner or clinical nurse specialist (as those terms are de- 
fined in section 1861(aa)(5)) who is working in collabora- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6408 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



710 



tion with the physician in accordance with State law, or a 
certified nurse-midwife (as defined in section 1861(gg)) as 
authorized by State law, or a physician assistant (as de- 
fined in section 1861(aa)(5)) under the supervision of the 
physician, has had a face-to-face encounter (including 
through use of telehealth and other than with respect to 
encounters that are incident to services involved) with the 
individual during the 6-month period preceding such cer- 
tification, or other reasonable timeframe as determined by 
the Secretary". [As revised by section 10605(b)~\ 

(b) Condition of Payment for Durable Medical Equip- 
ment.— Section 1834(a)(ll)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395m(a)(ll)(B)) is amended— 

(1) by striking "Order. — The Secretary" and inserting 
"Order. — 

"(i) In general. — The Secretary"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new clause: 

"(ii) Requirement for face to face encoun- 
ter. — The Secretary shall require that such an order 
be written pursuant to the physician documenting that 
a physician, a physician assistant, a nurse practi- 
tioner, or a clinical nurse specialist (as those terms are 
defined in section 1861(aa)(5)) has had a face-to-face 
encounter (including through use of telehealth under 
subsection (m) and other than with respect to encoun- 
ters that are incident to services involved) with the in- 
dividual involved during the 6-month period preceding 
such written order, or other reasonable timeframe as 
determined by the Secretary.". 

(c) Application to Other Areas Under Medicare. — The Sec- 
retary may apply the face-to-face encounter requirement described 
in the amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) to other items 
and services for which payment is provided under title XVIII of the 
Social Security Act based upon a finding that such an decision 
would reduce the risk of waste, fraud, or abuse. 

(d) Application to Medicaid. — The requirements pursuant to 
the amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall apply in the 
case of physicians making certifications for home health services 
under title XIX of the Social Security Act in the same manner and 
to the same extent as such requirements apply in the case of physi- 
cians making such certifications under title XVIII of such Act. 

SEC. 6408. ENHANCED PENALTIES. 

(a) Civil Monetary Penalties for False Statements or De- 
laying Inspections. — Section 1128A(a) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a(a)), as amended by section 5002(d)(2)(A), is 
amended — 

(1) in paragraph (6), by striking "or" at the end; and 

(2) by inserting after paragraph (7) the following new 
paragraphs: 

"(8) knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or used, 
a false record or statement material to a false or fraudulent 
claim for payment for items and services furnished under a 
Federal health care program; or 

June 9, 2010 



711 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6408 



"(9) fails to grant timely access, upon reasonable request 
(as defined by the Secretary in regulations), to the Inspector 
General of the Department of Health and Human Services, for 
the purpose of audits, investigations, evaluations, or other stat- 
utory functions of the Inspector General of the Department of 
Health and Human Services;"; and 

(3) in the first sentence — 

(A) by striking "or in cases under paragraph (7)" and 
inserting "in cases under paragraph (7)"; and 

(B) by striking "act)" and inserting "act, in cases under 
paragraph (8), $50,000 for each false record or statement, 
or in cases under paragraph (9), $15,000 for each day of 
the failure described in such paragraph)". 

(b) Medicare Advantage and Part D Plans. — 

(1) Ensuring timely inspections relating to contracts 
with ma organizations. — Section 1857(d)(2) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395w-27(d)(2)) is amended— 

(A) in subparagraph (A), by inserting "timely" before 
"inspect"; and 

(B) in subparagraph (B), by inserting "timely" before 
"audit and inspect". 

(2) Marketing violations. — Section 1857(g)(1) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-27(g)(D) is amended— 

(A) in subparagraph (F), by striking "or" at the end; 

(B) by inserting after subparagraph (G) the following 
new subparagraphs: 

"(H) except as provided under subparagraph (C) or (D) 
of section 1860D-l(b)(l), enrolls an individual in any plan 
under this part without the prior consent of the individual 
or the designee of the individual; 

"(I) transfers an individual enrolled under this part 
from one plan to another without the prior consent of the 
individual or the designee of the individual or solely for 
the purpose of earning a commission; 

"(J) fails to comply with marketing restrictions de- 
scribed in subsections (h) and (j) of section 1851 or applica- 
ble implementing regulations or guidance; or 

"(K) employs or contracts with any individual or entity 
who engages in the conduct described in subparagraphs 
(A) through (J) of this paragraph;"; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following new sentence: 
"The Secretary may provide, in addition to any other rem- 
edies authorized by law, for any of the remedies described 
in paragraph (2), if the Secretary determines that any em- 
ployee or agent of such organization, or any provider or 
supplier who contracts with such organization, has en- 
gaged in any conduct described in subparagraphs (A) 
through (K) of this paragraph.". 

(3) Provision of false information. — Section 
1857(g)(2)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w- 
27(g)(2)(A)) is amended by inserting "except with respect to a 
determination under subparagraph (E), an assessment of not 
more than the amount claimed by such plan or plan sponsor 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6409 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



712 



based upon the misrepresentation or falsified information in- 
volved," after "for each such determination,". 

(c) Obstruction of Program Audits— Section 1128(b)(2) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7(b)(2)) is amended— 

(1) in the heading, by inserting "OR audit" after "inves- 
tigation"; and 

(2) by striking "investigation into" and all that follows 
through the period and inserting "investigation or audit related 
to—" 

"(i) any offense described in paragraph (1) or in 
subsection (a); or 

"(ii) the use of funds received, directly or indi- 
rectly, from any Federal health care program (as de- 
fined in section 1128B(f)).". 

(d) Effective Date. — 

(1) In general. — Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
amendments made by this section shall apply to acts com- 
mitted on or after January 1, 2010. 

(2) Exception. — The amendments made by subsection 
(b)(1) take effect on the date of enactment of this Act. 

SEC. 6409 [42 U.S.C. 1395nn note]. MEDICARE SELF-REFERRAL DISCLO- 
SURE PROTOCOL. 

(a) Development of Self-Referral Disclosure Protocol. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services, in cooperation with the Inspector General of the De- 
partment of Health and Human Services, shall establish, not 
later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
a protocol to enable health care providers of services and sup- 
pliers to disclose an actual or potential violation of section 
1877 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395nn) pursuant to 
a self-referral disclosure protocol (in this section referred to as 
an "SRDP"). The SRDP shall include direction to health care 
providers of services and suppliers on — 

(A) a specific person, official, or office to whom such 
disclosures shall be made; and 

(B) instruction on the implication of the SRDP on cor- 
porate integrity agreements and corporate compliance 
agreements. 

(2) Publication on internet website of srdp informa- 
tion. — The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall post 
information on the public Internet website of the Centers for 
Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services to inform relevant stakeholders 
of how to disclose actual or potential violations pursuant to an 
SRDP. 

(3) Relation to advisory opinions. — The SRDP shall be 
separate from the advisory opinion process set forth in regula- 
tions implementing section 1877(g) of the Social Security Act. 

(b) Reduction in Amounts Owed. — The Secretary of Health 
and Human Services is authorized to reduce the amount due and 
owing for all violations under section 1877 of the Social Security 
Act to an amount less than that specified in subsection (g) of such 
section. In establishing such amount for a violation, the Secretary 
may consider the following factors: 

June 9, 2010 



713 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6410 



(1) The nature and extent of the improper or illegal prac- 
tice. 

(2) The timeliness of such self-disclosure. 

(3) The cooperation in providing additional information re- 
lated to the disclosure. 

(4) Such other factors as the Secretary considers appro- 
priate. 

(c) Report. — Not later than 18 months after the date on which 
the SRDP protocol is established under subsection (a)(1), the Sec- 
retary shall submit to Congress a report on the implementation of 
this section. Such report shall include — 

(1) the number of health care providers of services and 
suppliers making disclosures pursuant to the SRDP; 

(2) the amounts collected pursuant to the SRDP; 

(3) the types of violations reported under the SRDP; and 

(4) such other information as may be necessary to evaluate 
the impact of this section. 

SEC. 6410. ADJUSTMENTS TO THE MEDICARE DURABLE MEDICAL 
EQUIPMENT, PROSTHETICS, ORTHOTICS, AND SUPPLIES 
COMPETITIVE ACQUISITION PROGRAM. 

(a) Expansion of Round 2 of the DME Competitive Bidding 
Program.— Section 1847(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395w-3(a)(D) is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (B)(i)(II), by striking "70" and insert- 
ing "91"; and 

(2) in subparagraph (D)(ii) — 

(A) in subclause (I), by striking "and" at the end; 

(B) by redesignating subclause (II) as subclause (III); 

and 

(C) by inserting after subclause (I) the following new 
subclause: 

"(II) the Secretary shall include the next 21 
largest metropolitan statistical areas by total pop- 
ulation (after those selected under subclause (I)) 
for such round; and". 

(b) Requirement to Either Competitively Bid Areas or 
Use Competitive Bid Prices by 2016. — Section 1834(a)(1)(F) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(l)(F)) is amended— 

(1) in clause (i), by striking "and" at the end; 

(2) in clause (ii) — 

(A) by inserting "(and, in the case of covered items fur- 
nished on or after January 1, 2016, subject to clause (hi), 
shall)" after "may"; and 

(B) by striking the period at the end and inserting "; 
and"; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following new clause: 

"(hi) in the case of covered items furnished on or 
after January 1, 2016, the Secretary shall continue to 
make such adjustments described in clause (ii) as, 
under such competitive acquisition programs, addi- 
tional covered items are phased in or information is 
updated as contracts under section 1847 are recom- 
peted in accordance with section 1847(b)(3)(B).". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6411 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



714 



SEC. 6411. EXPANSION OF THE RECOVERY AUDIT CONTRACTOR (RAC) 
PROGRAM. 

(a) Expansion to Medicaid. — 

(1) State plan amendment. — Section 1902(a)(42) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(42)) is amended— 

(A) by striking "that the records" and inserting "that — 
"(A) the records"; 

(B) by inserting "and" after the semicolon; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following: 

"(B) not later than December 31, 2010, the State 
shall— 

"(i) establish a program under which the State 
contracts (consistent with State law and in the same 
manner as the Secretary enters into contracts with re- 
covery audit contractors under section 1893(h), subject 
to such exceptions or requirements as the Secretary 
may require for purposes of this title or a particular 
State) with 1 or more recovery audit contractors for 
the purpose of identifying underpayments and over- 
payments and recouping overpayments under the 
State plan and under any waiver of the State plan 
with respect to all services for which payment is made 
to any entity under such plan or waiver; and 

"(ii) provide assurances satisfactory to the Sec- 
retary that — 

"(I) under such contracts, payment shall be 
made to such a contractor only from amounts re- 
covered; 

"(II) from such amounts recovered, payment — 
"(aa) shall be made on a contingent basis 
for collecting overpayments; and 

"(bb) may be made in such amounts as 
the State may specify for identifying under- 
payments; 

"(III) the State has an adequate process for 
entities to appeal any adverse determination 
made by such contractors; and 

"(IV) such program is carried out in accord- 
ance with such requirements as the Secretary 
shall specify, including — 

"(aa) for purposes of section 1903(a)(7), 
that amounts expended by the State to carry 
out the program shall be considered amounts 
expended as necessary for the proper and effi- 
cient administration of the State plan or a 
waiver of the plan; 

"(bb) that section 1903(d) shall apply to 
amounts recovered under the program; and 

"(cc) that the State and any such contrac- 
tors under contract with the State shall co- 
ordinate such recovery audit efforts with 
other contractors or entities performing audits 
of entities receiving payments under the State 
plan or waiver in the State, including efforts 

June 9, 2010 



715 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6411 



with Federal and State law enforcement with 
respect to the Department of Justice, includ- 
ing the Federal Bureau of Investigations, the 
Inspector General of the Department of 
Health and Human Services, and the State 
medicaid fraud control unit; and". 
(2) Coordination; regulations. — 

(A) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services, acting through the Administrator of the Centers 
for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services, shall coordinate the ex- 
pansion of the Recovery Audit Contractor program to Med- 
icaid with States, particularly with respect to each State 
that enters into a contract with a recovery audit contractor 
for purposes of the State's Medicaid program prior to De- 
cember 31, 2010. 

(B) Regulations. — The Secretary of Health and 
Human Services shall promulgate regulations to carry out 
this subsection and the amendments made by this sub- 
section, including with respect to conditions of Federal fi- 
nancial participation, as specified by the Secretary. 

(b) Expansion to Medicare Parts C and D. — Section 1893(h) 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ddd(h)) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (1), in the matter preceding subparagraph 
(A), by striking "part A or B" and inserting "this title"; 

(2) in paragraph (2), by striking "parts A and B" and in- 
serting "this title"; 

(3) in paragraph (3), by inserting "(not later than Decem- 
ber 31, 2010, in the case of contracts relating to payments 
made under part C or D)" after "2010"; 

(4) in paragraph (4), in the matter preceding subparagraph 
(A), by striking "part A or B" and inserting "this title"; and 

(5) by adding at the end the following: 

"(9) Special rules relating to parts c and d. — The Sec- 
retary shall enter into contracts under paragraph (1) to require 
recovery audit contractors to — 

"(A) ensure that each MA plan under part C has an 
anti-fraud plan in effect and to review the effectiveness of 
each such anti-fraud plan; 

"(B) ensure that each prescription drug plan under 
part D has an anti-fraud plan in effect and to review the 
effectiveness of each such anti-fraud plan; 

"(C) examine claims for reinsurance payments under 
section 1860D-15(b) to determine whether prescription 
drug plans submitting such claims incurred costs in excess 
of the allowable reinsurance costs permitted under para- 
graph (2) of that section; and 

"(D) review estimates submitted by prescription drug 
plans by private plans with respect to the enrollment of 
high cost beneficiaries (as defined by the Secretary) and to 
compare such estimates with the numbers of such bene- 
ficiaries actually enrolled by such plans.". 

(c) Annual Report. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services, acting through the Administrator of the Centers for Medi- 
care &amp; Medicaid Services, shall submit an annual report to Con- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6501 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



716 



gress concerning the effectiveness of the Recovery Audit Contractor 
program under Medicaid and Medicare and shall include such re- 
ports recommendations for expanding or improving the program. 

Subtitle F — Additional Medicaid Program 
Integrity Provisions 

SEC. 6501. TERMINATION OF PROVIDER PARTICIPATION UNDER MED- 
ICAID IF TERMINATED UNDER MEDICARE OR OTHER 
STATE PLAN. 

Section 1902(a)(39) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 42 
U.S.C. 1396a(a)) is amended by inserting after "1128A," the fol- 
lowing: "terminate the participation of any individual or entity in 
such program if (subject to such exceptions as are permitted with 
respect to exclusion under sections 1128(c)(3)(B) and 1128(d)(3)(B)) 
participation of such individual or entity is terminated under title 
XVIII or any other State plan under this title,". 

SEC. 6502. MEDICAID EXCLUSION FROM PARTICIPATION RELATING TO 
CERTAIN OWNERSHIP, CONTROL, AND MANAGEMENT AF- 
FILIATIONS. 

Section 1902(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)), 
as amended by section 6401(b), is amended by inserting after para- 
graph (77) the following: 

"(78) provide that the State agency described in paragraph 
(9) exclude, with respect to a period, any individual or entity 
from participation in the program under the State plan if such 
individual or entity owns, controls, or manages an entity that 
(or if such entity is owned, controlled, or managed by an indi- 
vidual or entity that) — 

"(A) has unpaid overpayments (as defined by the Sec- 
retary) under this title during such period determined by 
the Secretary or the State agency to be delinquent; 

"(B) is suspended or excluded from participation under 
or whose participation is terminated under this title dur- 
ing such period; or 

"(C) is affiliated with an individual or entity that has 
been suspended or excluded from participation under this 
title or whose participation is terminated under this title 
during such period;". 

SEC. 6503. BILLING AGENTS, CLEARINGHOUSES, OR OTHER ALTER- 
NATE PAYEES REQUIRED TO REGISTER UNDER MED- 
ICAID. 

(a) In General. — Section 1902(a) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)), as amended by section 6502(a), is 
amended by inserting after paragraph (78), the following: 

"(79) provide that any agent, clearinghouse, or other alter- 
nate payee (as defined by the Secretary) that submits claims 
on behalf of a health care provider must register with the 
State and the Secretary in a form and manner specified by the 
Secretary;". 

June 9, 2010 



717 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6506 



SEC. 6504. REQUIREMENT TO REPORT EXPANDED SET OF DATA ELE- 
MENTS UNDER MMIS TO DETECT FRAUD AND ABUSE. 

(a) In General. — Section 1903(r)(l)(F) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(r)(l)(F)) is amended by inserting after "nec- 
essary" the following: "and including, for data submitted to the Sec- 
retary on or after January 1, 2010, data elements from the auto- 
mated data system that the Secretary determines to be necessary 
for program integrity, program oversight, and administration, at 
such frequency as the Secretary shall determine". 

(b) Managed Care Organizations. — 

(1) In general.— Section 1903(m)(2)(A)(xi) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(m)(2)(A)(xi)) is amended by in- 
serting "and for the provision of such data to the State at a fre- 
quency and level of detail to be specified by the Secretary" 
after "patients". 

(2) Effective date. — The amendment made by paragraph 
(1) shall apply with respect to contract years beginning on or 
after January 1, 2010. 

SEC. 6505. PROHIBITION ON PAYMENTS TO INSTITUTIONS OR ENTI- 
TIES LOCATED OUTSIDE OF THE UNITED STATES. 

Section 1902(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(a)), 
as amended by section 6503, is amended by inserting after para- 
graph (79) the following new paragraph: 

"(80) provide that the State shall not provide any pay- 
ments for items or services provided under the State plan or 
under a waiver to any financial institution or entity located 
outside of the United States;". 
SEC. 6506. OVERPAYMENTS. 

(a) Extension of Period for Collection of Overpayments 
Due to Fraud. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1903(d)(2) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(d)(2)) is amended— 

(A) in subparagraph (C) — 

(i) in the first sentence, by striking "60 days" and 
inserting "1 year"; and 

(ii) in the second sentence, by striking "60 days" 
and inserting "1-year period"; and 

(B) in subparagraph (D) — 

(i) in inserting "(i)" after "(D)"; and 

(ii) by adding at the end the following: 

"(ii) In any case where the State is unable to recover a debt 
which represents an overpayment (or any portion thereof) made to 
a person or other entity due to fraud within 1 year of discovery be- 
cause there is not a final determination of the amount of the over- 
payment under an administrative or judicial process (as applica- 
ble), including as a result of a judgment being under appeal, no ad- 
justment shall be made in the Federal payment to such State on 
account of such overpayment (or portion thereof) before the date 
that is 30 days after the date on which a final judgment (including, 
if applicable, a final determination on an appeal) is made.". 

(2) Effective date. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section take effect on the date of enactment of this Act and 
apply to overpayments discovered on or after that date. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6507 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



718 



(b) Corrective Action. — The Secretary shall promulgate reg- 
ulations that require States to correct Federally identified claims 
overpayments, of an ongoing or recurring nature, with new Med- 
icaid Management Information System (MMIS) edits, audits, or 
other appropriate corrective action. 

SEC. 6507. MANDATORY STATE USE OF NATIONAL CORRECT CODING 
INITIATD7E. 

Section 1903(r) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(r)) 
is amended — 

(1) in paragraph (1)(B) — 

(A) in clause (ii), by striking "and" at the end; 

(B) in clause (hi), by adding "and" after the semi-colon; 

and 

(C) by adding at the end the following new clause: 
"(iv) effective for claims filed on or after October 

1, 2010, incorporate compatible methodologies of the 
National Correct Coding Initiative administered by the 
Secretary (or any successor initiative to promote cor- 
rect coding and to control improper coding leading to 
inappropriate payment) and such other methodologies 
of that Initiative (or such other national correct coding 
methodologies) as the Secretary identifies in accord- 
ance with paragraph (4);"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 

"(4) For purposes of paragraph (l)(B)(iv), the Secretary shall do 
the following: 

"(A) Not later than September 1, 2010: 

"(i) Identify those methodologies of the National Cor- 
rect Coding Initiative administered by the Secretary (or 
any successor initiative to promote correct coding and to 
control improper coding leading to inappropriate payment) 
which are compatible to claims filed under this title. 

"(ii) Identify those methodologies of such Initiative (or 
such other national correct coding methodologies) that 
should be incorporated into claims filed under this title 
with respect to items or services for which States provide 
medical assistance under this title and no national correct 
coding methodologies have been established under such 
Initiative with respect to title XVIII. 
"(iii) Notify States of— 

"(I) the methodologies identified under subpara- 
graphs (A) and (B) (and of any other national correct 
coding methodologies identified under subparagraph 
(B));and 

"(II) how States are to incorporate such meth- 
odologies into claims filed under this title. 
"(B) Not later than March 1, 2011, submit a report to Con- 
gress that includes the notice to States under clause (iii) of 
subparagraph (A) and an analysis supporting the identification 
of the methodologies made under clauses (i) and (ii) of subpara- 
graph (A).". 

June 9, 2010 



719 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6601\519 ERISA 



SEC. 6508. GENERAL EFFECTIVE DATE. 

(a) In General. — Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, 
this subtitle and the amendments made by this subtitle take effect 
on January 1, 2011, without regard to whether final regulations to 
carry out such amendments and subtitle have been promulgated by 
that date. 

(b) Delay if State Legislation Required. — In the case of a 
State plan for medical assistance under title XIX of the Social Se- 
curity Act or a child health plan under title XXI of such Act which 
the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines requires 
State legislation (other than legislation appropriating funds) in 
order for the plan to meet the additional requirement imposed by 
the amendments made by this subtitle, the State plan or child 
health plan shall not be regarded as failing to comply with the re- 
quirements of such title solely on the basis of its failure to meet 
this additional requirement before the first day of the first calendar 
quarter beginning after the close of the first regular session of the 
State legislature that begins after the date of the enactment of this 
Act. For purposes of the previous sentence, in the case of a State 
that has a 2-year legislative session, each year of such session shall 
be deemed to be a separate regular session of the State legislature. 

Subtitle G — Additional Program Integrity 

Provisions 

SEC. 6601. PROHIBITION ON FALSE STATEMENTS AND REPRESENTA- 
TIONS. 

(a) Prohibition. — Part 5 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following: 

"SEC. 519 [29 U.S.C. 1149]. PROHIBITION ON FALSE STATEMENTS AND 
REPRESENTATIONS. 

"No person, in connection with a plan or other arrangement 
that is multiple employer welfare arrangement described in section 
3(40), shall make a false statement or false representation of fact, 
knowing it to be false, in connection with the marketing or sale of 
such plan or arrangement, to any employee, any member of an em- 
ployee organization, any beneficiary, any employer, any employee 
organization, the Secretary, or any State, or the representative or 
agent of any such person, State, or the Secretary, concerning — 

"(1) the financial condition or solvency of such plan or ar- 
rangement; 

"(2) the benefits provided by such plan or arrangement; 

"(3) the regulatory status of such plan or other arrange- 
ment under any Federal or State law governing collective bar- 
gaining, labor management relations, or intern union affairs; 
or 

"(4) the regulatory status of such plan or other arrange- 
ment regarding exemption from state regulatory authority 
under this Act. 

This section shall not apply to any plan or arrangement that does 
not fall within the meaning of the term 'multiple employer welfare 
arrangement' under section 3(40)(A).". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6601 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



720 



(b) Criminal Penalties. — Section 501 of the Employee Retire- 
ment Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1131) is amended — 

(1) by inserting "(a)" before "Any person"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following: 

"(b) Any person that violates section 519 shall upon conviction 
be imprisoned not more than 10 years or fined under title 18, 
United States Code, or both.". 

(c) Conforming Amendment. — The table of sections for part 5 
of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security 
Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"Sec. 519. Prohibition on false statement and representations.". 
SEC. 6602. CLARIFYING DEFINITION. 

Section 24(a)(2) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by 
inserting "or section 411, 518, or 511 of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974," after "1954 of this title". 

SEC. 6603. DEVELOPMENT OF MODEL UNIFORM REPORT FORM. 

Part C of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 300gg-91 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing: 

"SEC. 2794 [42 U.S.C. 300gg-95]. UNIFORM FRAUD AND ABUSE REFER- 
RAL FORMAT. 

"The Secretary shall request the National Association of Insur- 
ance Commissioners to develop a model uniform report form for 
private health insurance issuer seeking to refer suspected fraud 
and abuse to State insurance departments or other responsible 
State agencies for investigation. The Secretary shall request that 
the National Association of Insurance Commissioners develop rec- 
ommendations for uniform reporting standards for such referrals.". 

SEC. 6604. APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW TO COMBAT FRAUD AND 
ABUSE. 

(a) In General. — Part 5 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), 
as amended by section 6601, is further amended by adding at the 
end the following: 

"SEC. 520 [29 U.S.C. 1150]. APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW TO COMBAT 
FRAUD AND ABUSE. 

"The Secretary may, for the purpose of identifying, preventing, 
or prosecuting fraud and abuse, adopt regulatory standards estab- 
lishing, or issue an order relating to a specific person establishing, 
that a person engaged in the business of providing insurance 
through a multiple employer welfare arrangement described in sec- 
tion 3(40) is subject to the laws of the States in which such person 
operates which regulate insurance in such State, notwithstanding 
section 514(b)(6) of this Act or the Liability Risk Retention Act of 
1986, and regardless of whether the law of the State is otherwise 
preempted under any of such provisions. This section shall not 
apply to any plan or arrangement that does not fall within the 
meaning of the term 'multiple employer welfare arrangement' 
under section 3(40)(A).". 

(b) Conforming Amendment. — The table of sections for part 5 
of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security 

June 9, 2010 



721 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6605 



Act of 1974, as amended by section 6601, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following: 

"Sec. 520. Applicability of State law to combat fraud and abuse.". 

SEC. 6605. ENABLING THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR TO ISSUE ADMIN- 
ISTRATIVE SUMMARY CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS AND 
SUMMARY SEIZURES ORDERS AGAINST PLANS THAT ARE 
IN FINANCIALLY HAZARDOUS CONDITION. 

(a) In General. — Part 5 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), 
as amended by section 6604, is further amended by adding at the 
end the following: 

"SEC. 521 [29 U.S.C. 1151]. ADMINISTRATIVE SUMMARY CEASE AND DE- 
SIST ORDERS AND SUMMARY SEIZURE ORDERS AGAINST 
MULTIPLE EMPLOYER WELFARE ARRANGEMENTS IN FI- 
NANCIALLY HAZARDOUS CONDITION. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary may issue a cease and desist 
(ex parte) order under this title if it appears to the Secretary that 
the alleged conduct of a multiple employer welfare arrangement de- 
scribed in section 3(40), other than a plan or arrangement de- 
scribed in subsection (g), is fraudulent, or creates an immediate 
danger to the public safety or welfare, or is causing or can be rea- 
sonably expected to cause significant, imminent, and irreparable 
public injury. 

"(b) Hearing. — A person that is adversely affected by the 
issuance of a cease and desist order under subsection (a) may re- 
quest a hearing by the Secretary regarding such order. The Sec- 
retary may require that a proceeding under this section, including 
all related information and evidence, be conducted in a confidential 
manner. 

"(c) Burden of Proof. — The burden of proof in any hearing 
conducted under subsection (b) shall be on the party requesting the 
hearing to show cause why the cease and desist order should be set 
aside. 

"(d) Determination. — Based upon the evidence presented at a 
hearing under subsection (b), the cease and desist order involved 
may be affirmed, modified, or set aside by the Secretary in whole 
or in part. 

"(e) Seizure. — The Secretary may issue a summary seizure 
order under this title if it appears that a multiple employer welfare 
arrangement is in a financially hazardous condition. 

"(f) Regulations. — The Secretary may promulgate such regu- 
lations or other guidance as may be necessary or appropriate to 
carry out this section. 

"(g) Exception. — This section shall not apply to any plan or 
arrangement that does not fall within the meaning of the term 
'multiple employer welfare arrangement' under section 3(40)(A).". 

(b) Conforming Amendment. — The table of sections for part 5 
of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security 
Act of 1974, as amended by section 6604, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following: 

"Sec. 521. Administrative summary cease and desist orders and summary seizure 
orders against health plans in financially hazardous condition.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6606 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



722 



SEC. 6606. MEWA PLAN REGISTRATION WITH DEPARTMENT OF LABOR. 

Section 101(g) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1021(g)) is amended— 

(1) by striking "Secretary may" and inserting "Secretary 
shall"; and 

(2) by inserting "to register with the Secretary prior to op- 
erating in a State and may, by regulation, require such mul- 
tiple employer welfare arrangements" after "not group health 
plans". 

SEC. 6607. PERMITTING EVIDENTIARY PRIVILEGE AND CONFIDENTIAL 
COMMUNICATIONS. 

Section 504 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1134) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing: 

"(d) The Secretary may promulgate a regulation that provides 
an evidentiary privilege for, and provides for the confidentiality of 
communications between or among, any of the following entities or 
their agents, consultants, or employees: 

"(1) A State insurance department. 

"(2) A State attorney general. 

"(3) The National Association of Insurance Commissioners. 

"(4) The Department of Labor. 

"(5) The Department of the Treasury. 

"(6) The Department of Justice. 

"(7) The Department of Health and Human Services. 

"(8) Any other Federal or State authority that the Sec- 
retary determines is appropriate for the purposes of enforcing 
the provisions of this title. 

"(e) The privilege established under subsection (d) shall apply 
to communications related to any investigation, audit, examination, 
or inquiry conducted or coordinated by any of the agencies. A com- 
munication that is privileged under subsection (d) shall not waive 
any privilege otherwise available to the communicating agency or 
to any person who provided the information that is commu- 
nicated.". 

Subtitle H — Elder Justice Act 

SEC. 6701 [42 U.S.C. 1305 note]. SHORT TITLE OF SUBTITLE. 

This subtitle may be cited as the "Elder Justice Act of 2009". 
SEC. 6702. DEFINITIONS. 

Except as otherwise specifically provided, any term that is de- 
fined in section 2011 of the Social Security Act (as added by section 
6703(a)) and is used in this subtitle has the meaning given such 
term by such section. 

SEC. 6703. ELDER JUSTICE. 

(a) Elder Justice. — 

(1) In general— Title XX of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397 et seq.) is amended— 

(A) in the heading, by inserting "AND ELDER JUS- 
TICE" after "SOCIAL SERVICES"; 

(B) by inserting before section 2001 the following: 

June 9, 2010 



723 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6703X2011 SSA 



"Subtitle A — Block Grants to States for 
Social Services"; 

and 

(C) by adding at the end the following: 

"Subtitle B— Elder Justice 

"SEC. 2011 [42 U.S.C. 1397j]. DEFINITIONS. 

"In this subtitle: 

"(1) Abuse. — The term 'abuse' means the knowing inflic- 
tion of physical or psychological harm or the knowing depriva- 
tion of goods or services that are necessary to meet essential 
needs or to avoid physical or psychological harm. 

"(2) Adult protective services. — The term 'adult protec- 
tive services' means such services provided to adults as the 
Secretary may specify and includes services such as — 

"(A) receiving reports of adult abuse, neglect, or exploi- 
tation; 

"(B) investigating the reports described in subpara- 
graph (A); 

"(C) case planning, monitoring, evaluation, and other 
case work and services; and 

"(D) providing, arranging for, or facilitating the provi- 
sion of medical, social service, economic, legal, housing, 
law enforcement, or other protective, emergency, or sup- 
port services. 

"(3) Caregiver. — The term 'caregiver' means an individual 
who has the responsibility for the care of an elder, either vol- 
untarily, by contract, by receipt of payment for care, or as a re- 
sult of the operation of law, and means a family member or 
other individual who provides (on behalf of such individual or 
of a public or private agency, organization, or institution) com- 
pensated or uncompensated care to an elder who needs sup- 
portive services in any setting. 

"(4) Direct care. — The term 'direct care' means care by an 
employee or contractor who provides assistance or long-term 
care services to a recipient. 

"(5) Elder. — The term 'elder' means an individual age 60 
or older. 

"(6) Elder justice. — The term 'elder justice' means — 
"(A) from a societal perspective, efforts to — 

"(i) prevent, detect, treat, intervene in, and pros- 
ecute elder abuse, neglect, and exploitation; and 

"(ii) protect elders with diminished capacity while 
maximizing their autonomy; and 

"(B) from an individual perspective, the recognition of 
an elder's rights, including the right to be free of abuse, 
neglect, and exploitation. 

"(7) Eligible entity. — The term 'eligible entity' means a 
State or local government agency, Indian tribe or tribal organi- 
zation, or any other public or private entity that is engaged in 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6703X2011 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



724 



and has expertise in issues relating to elder justice or in a field 
necessary to promote elder justice efforts. 

"(8) Exploitation. — The term 'exploitation' means the 
fraudulent or otherwise illegal, unauthorized, or improper act 
or process of an individual, including a caregiver or fiduciary, 
that uses the resources of an elder for monetary or personal 
benefit, profit, or gain, or that results in depriving an elder of 
rightful access to, or use of, benefits, resources, belongings, or 
assets. 

"(9) Fiduciary. — The term 'fiduciary' — 

"(A) means a person or entity with the legal responsi- 
bility — 

"(i) to make decisions on behalf of and for the ben- 
efit of another person; and 

"(ii) to act in good faith and with fairness; and 
"(B) includes a trustee, a guardian, a conservator, an 
executor, an agent under a financial power of attorney or 
health care power of attorney, or a representative payee. 
"(10) Grant. — The term 'grant' includes a contract, cooper- 
ative agreement, or other mechanism for providing financial 
assistance. 

"(11) Guardianship. — The term 'guardianship' means — 

"(A) the process by which a State court determines 
that an adult individual lacks capacity to make decisions 
about self-care or property, and appoints another indi- 
vidual or entity known as a guardian, as a conservator, or 
by a similar term, as a surrogate decisionmaker; 

"(B) the manner in which the court-appointed surro- 
gate decisionmaker carries out duties to the individual and 
the court; or 

"(C) the manner in which the court exercises oversight 
of the surrogate decisionmaker. 
"(12) Indian tribe. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'Indian tribe' has the 
meaning given such term in section 4 of the Indian Self- 
Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 
450b). 

"(B) Inclusion of pueblo and rancheria. — The term 
'Indian tribe' includes any Pueblo or Rancheria. 
"(13) Law enforcement. — The term 'law enforcement' 
means the full range of potential responders to elder abuse, ne- 
glect, and exploitation including — 

"(A) police, sheriffs, detectives, public safety officers, 
and corrections personnel; 

"(B) prosecutors; 

"(C) medical examiners; 

"(D) investigators; and 

"(E) coroners. 
"(14) Long-term care. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'long-term care' means 
supportive and health services specified by the Secretary 
for individuals who need assistance because the individ- 
uals have a loss of capacity for self-care due to illness, dis- 
ability, or vulnerability. 

June 9, 2010 



725 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6703X2011 SSA 



"(B) Loss of capacity for self-care. — For purposes 
of subparagraph (A), the term 'loss of capacity for self-care' 
means an inability to engage in 1 or more activities of 
daily living, including eating, dressing, bathing, manage- 
ment of one's financial affairs, and other activities the Sec- 
retary determines appropriate. 

"(15) Long-term care facility. — The term 'long-term care 
facility' means a residential care provider that arranges for, or 
directly provides, long-term care. 

"(16) Neglect. — The term 'neglect' means — 

"(A) the failure of a caregiver or fiduciary to provide 
the goods or services that are necessary to maintain the 
health or safety of an elder; or 

"(B) self-neglect. 
"(17) Nursing facility. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'nursing facility' has the 
meaning given such term under section 1919(a). 

"(B) Inclusion of skilled nursing facility. — The 
term 'nursing facility' includes a skilled nursing facility (as 
defined in section 1819(a)). 

"(18) Self-neglect. — The term 'self-neglect' means an 
adult's inability, due to physical or mental impairment or di- 
minished capacity, to perform essential self-care tasks includ- 
ing— 

"(A) obtaining essential food, clothing, shelter, and 
medical care; 

"(B) obtaining goods and services necessary to main- 
tain physical health, mental health, or general safety; or 

"(C) managing one's own financial affairs. 
"(19) Serious bodily injury. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'serious bodily injury' 
means an injury — 

"(i) involving extreme physical pain; 
"(ii) involving substantial risk of death; 
"(hi) involving protracted loss or impairment of 
the function of a bodily member, organ, or mental fac- 
ulty; or 

"(iv) requiring medical intervention such as sur- 
gery, hospitalization, or physical rehabilitation. 
"(B) Criminal sexual abuse. — Serious bodily injury 
shall be considered to have occurred if the conduct causing 
the injury is conduct described in section 2241 (relating to 
aggravated sexual abuse) or 2242 (relating to sexual 
abuse) of title 18, United States Code, or any similar of- 
fense under State law. 

"(20) Social. — The term 'social', when used with respect to 
a service, includes adult protective services. 

"(21) State legal assistance developer. — The term 
'State legal assistance developer' means an individual de- 
scribed in section 731 of the Older Americans Act of 1965. 

"(22) State long-term care ombudsman. — The term 
'State Long-Term Care Ombudsman' means the State Long- 
Term Care Ombudsman described in section 712(a)(2) of the 
Older Americans Act of 1965. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6703\2012SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



726 



"SEC. 2012 [42 U.S.C. 1397j-l]. GENERAL PROVISIONS. 

"(a) Protection of Privacy. — In pursuing activities under 
this subtitle, the Secretary shall ensure the protection of individual 
health privacy consistent with the regulations promulgated under 
section 264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and Account- 
ability Act of 1996 and applicable State and local privacy regula- 
tions. 

"(b) Rule of Construction. — Nothing in this subtitle shall be 
construed to interfere with or abridge an elder's right to practice 
his or her religion through reliance on prayer alone for healing 
when this choice — 

"(1) is contemporaneously expressed, either orally or in 
writing, with respect to a specific illness or injury which the 
elder has at the time of the decision by an elder who is com- 
petent at the time of the decision; 

"(2) is previously set forth in a living will, health care 
proxy, or other advance directive document that is validly exe- 
cuted and applied under State law; or 

"(3) may be unambiguously deduced from the elder's life 
history. 

"PART I— NATIONAL COORDINATION OF 
ELDER JUSTICE ACTIVITIES AND RESEARCH 

"Subpart A — Elder Justice Coordinating Council 
and Advisory Board on Elder Abuse, Neglect, 
and Exploitation 

"SEC. 2021 [42 U.S.C. 1397k]. ELDER JUSTICE COORDINATING COUNCIL. 

"(a) Establishment. — There is established within the Office of 
the Secretary an Elder Justice Coordinating Council (in this section 
referred to as the 'Council'). 
"(b) Membership. — 

"(1) In general. — The Council shall be composed of the 
following members: 

"(A) The Secretary (or the Secretary's designee). 
"(B) The Attorney General (or the Attorney General's 
designee). 

"(C) The head of each Federal department or agency 
or other governmental entity identified by the Chair re- 
ferred to in subsection (d) as having responsibilities, or ad- 
ministering programs, relating to elder abuse, neglect, and 
exploitation. 

"(2) Requirement. — Each member of the Council shall be 

an officer or employee of the Federal Government. 

"(c) Vacancies. — Any vacancy in the Council shall not affect 
its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original 
appointment was made. 

"(d) Chair. — The member described in subsection (b)(1)(A) 
shall be Chair of the Council. 

"(e) Meetings. — The Council shall meet at least 2 times per 
year, as determined by the Chair. 

"(f) Duties.— 

June 9, 2010 



727 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6703\2021 SSA 



"(1) In general. — The Council shall make recommenda- 
tions to the Secretary for the coordination of activities of the 
Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of 
Justice, and other relevant Federal, State, local, and private 
agencies and entities, relating to elder abuse, neglect, and ex- 
ploitation and other crimes against elders. 

"(2) Report. — Not later than the date that is 2 years after 
the date of enactment of the Elder Justice Act of 2009 and 
every 2 years thereafter, the Council shall submit to the Com- 
mittee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways 
and Means and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of 
the House of Representatives a report that — 

"(A) describes the activities and accomplishments of, 

and challenges faced by — 

"(i) the Council; and 

"(ii) the entities represented on the Council; and 
"(B) makes such recommendations for legislation, 

model laws, or other action as the Council determines to 

be appropriate. 
"(g) Powers of the Council. — 

"(1) Information from federal agencies. — Subject to 
the requirements of section 2012(a), the Council may secure di- 
rectly from any Federal department or agency such informa- 
tion as the Council considers necessary to carry out this sec- 
tion. Upon request of the Chair of the Council, the head of 
such department or agency shall furnish such information to 
the Council. 

"(2) Postal services. — The Council may use the United 
States mails in the same manner and under the same condi- 
tions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Gov- 
ernment. 

"(h) Travel Expenses. — The members of the Council shall not 
receive compensation for the performance of services for the Coun- 
cil. The members shall be allowed travel expenses, including per 
diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of 
agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States 
Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business 
in the performance of services for the Council. Notwithstanding 
section 1342 of title 31, United States Code, the Secretary may ac- 
cept the voluntary and uncompensated services of the members of 
the Council. 

"(i) Detail of Government Employees. — Any Federal Gov- 
ernment employee may be detailed to the Council without reim- 
bursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of 
civil service status or privilege. 

"(j) Status as Permanent Council. — Section 14 of the Fed- 
eral Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply to the 
Council. 

"(k) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are author- 
ized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out 
this section. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. B703N2022 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



728 



"SEC. 2022 [42 U.S.C. 1397k-l]. ADVISORY BOARD ON ELDER ABUSE, NE- 
GLECT, AND EXPLOITATION. 

"(a) Establishment. — There is established a board to be 
known as the 'Advisory Board on Elder Abuse, Neglect, and Exploi- 
tation' (in this section referred to as the Advisory Board') to create 
short- and long-term multidisciplinary strategic plans for the devel- 
opment of the field of elder justice and to make recommendations 
to the Elder Justice Coordinating Council established under section 
2021. 

"(b) Composition. — The Advisory Board shall be composed of 
27 members appointed by the Secretary from among members of 
the general public who are individuals with experience and exper- 
tise in elder abuse, neglect, and exploitation prevention, detection, 
treatment, intervention, or prosecution. 

"(c) Solicitation of Nominations. — The Secretary shall pub- 
lish a notice in the Federal Register soliciting nominations for the 
appointment of members of the Advisory Board under subsection 
(b). 

"(d) Terms.— 

"(1) In general. — Each member of the Advisory Board 
shall be appointed for a term of 3 years, except that, of the 
members first appointed — 

"(A) 9 shall be appointed for a term of 3 years; 

"(B) 9 shall be appointed for a term of 2 years; and 

"(C) 9 shall be appointed for a term of 1 year. 
"(2) Vacancies. — 

"(A) In general. — Any vacancy on the Advisory Board 
shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same 
manner as the original appointment was made. 

"(B) Filling unexpired term. — An individual chosen 
to fill a vacancy shall be appointed for the unexpired term 
of the member replaced. 

"(3) Expiration of terms. — The term of any member shall 
not expire before the date on which the member's successor 
takes office. 

"(e) Election of Officers. — The Advisory Board shall elect a 
Chair and Vice Chair from among its members. The Advisory 
Board shall elect its initial Chair and Vice Chair at its initial meet- 
ing. 

"(f) Duties.— 

"(1) Enhance communication on promoting quality of, 
and preventing abuse, neglect, and exploitation in, long- 
TERM care. — The Advisory Board shall develop collaborative 
and innovative approaches to improve the quality of, including 
preventing abuse, neglect, and exploitation in, long-term care. 

"(2) Collaborative efforts to develop consensus 
around the management of certain quality-related fac- 
TORS. — 

"(A) In general. — The Advisory Board shall establish 
multidisciplinary panels to address, and develop consensus 
on, subjects relating to improving the quality of long-term 
care. At least 1 such panel shall address, and develop con- 
sensus on, methods for managing resident-to-resident 
abuse in long-term care. 

June 9, 2010 



729 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6703\2022 SSA 



"(B) Activities conducted. — The multidisciplinary 
panels established under subparagraph (A) shall examine 
relevant research and data, identify best practices with re- 
spect to the subject of the panel, determine the best way 
to carry out those best practices in a practical and feasible 
manner, and determine an effective manner of distributing 
information on such subject. 

"(3) Report. — Not later than the date that is 18 months 
after the date of enactment of the Elder Justice Act of 2009, 
and annually thereafter, the Advisory Board shall prepare and 
submit to the Elder Justice Coordinating Council, the Com- 
mittee on Finance of the Senate, and the Committee on Ways 
and Means and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of 
the House of Representatives a report containing — 

"(A) information on the status of Federal, State, and 
local public and private elder justice activities; 

"(B) recommendations (including recommended prior- 
ities) regarding — 

"(i) elder justice programs, research, training, 
services, practice, enforcement, and coordination; 

"(ii) coordination between entities pursuing elder 
justice efforts and those involved in related areas that 
may inform or overlap with elder justice efforts, such 
as activities to combat violence against women and 
child abuse and neglect; and 

"(hi) activities relating to adult fiduciary systems, 
including guardianship and other fiduciary arrange- 
ments; 

"(C) recommendations for specific modifications needed 
in Federal and State laws (including regulations) or for 
programs, research, and training to enhance prevention, 
detection, and treatment (including diagnosis) of, interven- 
tion in (including investigation of), and prosecution of elder 
abuse, neglect, and exploitation; 

"(D) recommendations on methods for the most effec- 
tive coordinated national data collection with respect to 
elder justice, and elder abuse, neglect, and exploitation; 
and 

"(E) recommendations for a multidisciplinary strategic 

plan to guide the effective and efficient development of the 

field of elder justice. 
"(g) Powers of the Advisory Board. — 

"(1) Information from federal agencies. — Subject to 
the requirements of section 2012(a), the Advisory Board may 
secure directly from any Federal department or agency such 
information as the Advisory Board considers necessary to carry 
out this section. Upon request of the Chair of the Advisory 
Board, the head of such department or agency shall furnish 
such information to the Advisory Board. 

"(2) Sharing of data and reports. — The Advisory Board 
may request from any entity pursuing elder justice activities 
under the Elder Justice Act of 2009 or an amendment made by 
that Act, any data, reports, or recommendations generated in 
connection with such activities. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6703\2023 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



730 



"(3) Postal services. — The Advisory Board may use the 
United States mails in the same manner and under the same 
conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal 
Government. 

"(h) Travel Expenses. — The members of the Advisory Board 
shall not receive compensation for the performance of services for 
the Advisory Board. The members shall be allowed travel expenses 
for up to 4 meetings per year, including per diem in lieu of subsist- 
ence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under sub- 
chapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away 
from their homes or regular places of business in the performance 
of services for the Advisory Board. Notwithstanding section 1342 of 
title 31, United States Code, the Secretary may accept the vol- 
untary and uncompensated services of the members of the Advisory 
Board. 

"(i) Detail of Government Employees. — Any Federal Gov- 
ernment employee may be detailed to the Advisory Board without 
reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or 
loss of civil service status or privilege. 

"(j) Status as Permanent Advisory Committee. — Section 14 
of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.) shall not 
apply to the advisory board. 

"(k) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are author- 
ized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out 
this section. 

"SEC. 2023 [42 U.S.C. 1397k-2]. RESEARCH PROTECTIONS. 

"(a) Guidelines. — The Secretary shall promulgate guidelines 
to assist researchers working in the area of elder abuse, neglect, 
and exploitation, with issues relating to human subject protections. 

"(b) Definition of Legally Authorized Representative for 
Application of Regulations. — For purposes of the application of 
subpart A of part 46 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations, to re- 
search conducted under this subpart, the term 'legally authorized 
representative' means, unless otherwise provided by law, the indi- 
vidual or judicial or other body authorized under the applicable law 
to consent to medical treatment on behalf of another person. 

"SEC. 2024 [42 U.S.C. 1397k-3]. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS. 

"There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this sub- 
part — 

"(1) for fiscal year 2011, $6,500,000; and 

"(2) for each of fiscal years 2012 through 2014, $7,000,000. 

"Subpart B — Elder Abuse, Neglect, and 
Exploitation Forensic Centers 

"SEC. 2031 [42 U.S.C. 13971]. ESTABLISHMENT AND SUPPORT OF ELDER 
ABUSE, NEGLECT, AND EXPLOITATION FORENSIC CEN- 
TERS. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary, in consultation with the At- 
torney General, shall make grants to eligible entities to establish 
and operate stationary and mobile forensic centers, to develop fo- 
rensic expertise regarding, and provide services relating to, elder 
abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

June 9, 2010 



731 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6703\2041 SSA 



"(b) Stationary Forensic Centers. — The Secretary shall 
make 4 of the grants described in subsection (a) to institutions of 
higher education with demonstrated expertise in forensics or com- 
mitment to preventing or treating elder abuse, neglect, or exploi- 
tation, to establish and operate stationary forensic centers. 

"(c) Mobile Centers. — The Secretary shall make 6 of the 
grants described in subsection (a) to appropriate entities to estab- 
lish and operate mobile forensic centers. 
"(d) Authorized Activities. — 

"(1) Development of forensic markers and methodolo- 
gies. — An eligible entity that receives a grant under this sec- 
tion shall use funds made available through the grant to assist 
in determining whether abuse, neglect, or exploitation occurred 
and whether a crime was committed and to conduct research 
to describe and disseminate information on — 

"(A) forensic markers that indicate a case in which 
elder abuse, neglect, or exploitation may have occurred; 
and 

"(B) methodologies for determining, in such a case, 
when and how health care, emergency service, social and 
protective services, and legal service providers should in- 
tervene and when the providers should report the case to 
law enforcement authorities. 

"(2) Development of forensic expertise. — An eligible 
entity that receives a grant under this section shall use funds 
made available through the grant to develop forensic expertise 
regarding elder abuse, neglect, and exploitation in order to pro- 
vide medical and forensic evaluation, therapeutic intervention, 
victim support and advocacy, case review, and case tracking. 

"(3) Collection of evidence. — The Secretary, in coordi- 
nation with the Attorney General, shall use data made avail- 
able by grant recipients under this section to develop the ca- 
pacity of geriatric health care professionals and law enforce- 
ment to collect forensic evidence, including collecting forensic 
evidence relating to a potential determination of elder abuse, 
neglect, or exploitation. 

"(e) Application. — To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section, an entity shall submit an application to the Secretary at 
such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
Secretary may require. 

"(f) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are authorized 
to be appropriated to carry out this section — 
"(1) for fiscal year 2011, $4,000,000; 
"(2) for fiscal year 2012, $6,000,000; and 
"(3) for each of fiscal years 2013 and 2014, $8,000,000. 

"PART II— PROGRAMS TO PROMOTE ELDER 

JUSTICE 

"SEC. 2041 [42 U.S.C. 1397m]. ENHANCEMENT OF LONG-TERM CARE. 

"(a) Grants and Incentives for Long-Term Care Staff- 
ing. — 



Sec. 6703\2041 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



732 



"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall carry out activities, 
including activities described in paragraphs (2) and (3), to pro- 
vide incentives for individuals to train for, seek, and maintain 
employment providing direct care in long-term care. 

"(2) Specific programs to enhance training, recruit- 
ment, AND RETENTION OF STAFF. — 

"(A) Coordination with secretary of labor to re- 
cruit and train long-term care staff. — The Secretary 
shall coordinate activities under this subsection with the 
Secretary of Labor in order to provide incentives for indi- 
viduals to train for and seek employment providing direct 
care in long-term care. 

"(B) Career ladders and wage or benefit in- 
creases TO INCREASE STAFFING IN LONG-TERM CARE. — 

"(i) In general. — The Secretary shall make 
grants to eligible entities to carry out programs 
through which the entities — 

"(I) offer, to employees who provide direct care 
to residents of an eligible entity or individuals re- 
ceiving community-based long-term care from an 
eligible entity, continuing training and varying 
levels of certification, based on observed clinical 
care practices and the amount of time the employ- 
ees spend providing direct care; and 

"(II) provide, or make arrangements to pro- 
vide, bonuses or other increased compensation or 
benefits to employees who achieve certification 
under such a program. 

"(ii) Application. — To be eligible to receive a 
grant under this subparagraph, an eligible entity shall 
submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in 
such manner, and containing such information as the 
Secretary may require (which may include evidence of 
consultation with the State in which the eligible entity 
is located with respect to carrying out activities fund- 
ed under the grant). 

"(hi) Authority to limit number of appli- 
cants. — Nothing in this subparagraph shall be con- 
strued as prohibiting the Secretary from limiting the 
number of applicants for a grant under this subpara- 
graph. 

"(3) Specific programs to improve management prac- 
tices. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall make grants to 
eligible entities to enable the entities to provide training 
and technical assistance. 

"(B) Authorized activities. — An eligible entity that 
receives a grant under subparagraph (A) shall use funds 
made available through the grant to provide training and 
technical assistance regarding management practices 
using methods that are demonstrated to promote retention 
of individuals who provide direct care, such as — 

"(i) the establishment of standard human resource 

policies that reward high performance, including poli- 

June 9, 2010 



733 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. B703N2041 SSA 



cies that provide for improved wages and benefits on 
the basis of job reviews; 

"(ii) the establishment of motivational and 
thoughtful work organization practices; 

"(hi) the creation of a workplace culture that re- 
spects and values caregivers and their needs; 

"(iv) the promotion of a workplace culture that re- 
spects the rights of residents of an eligible entity or in- 
dividuals receiving community-based long-term care 
from an eligible entity and results in improved care for 
the residents or the individuals; and 

"(v) the establishment of other programs that pro- 
mote the provision of high quality care, such as a con- 
tinuing education program that provides additional 
hours of training, including on-the-job training, for 
employees who are certified nurse aides. 
"(C) Application. — To be eligible to receive a grant 
under this paragraph, an eligible entity shall submit an 
application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, 
and containing such information as the Secretary may re- 
quire (which may include evidence of consultation with the 
State in which the eligible entity is located with respect to 
carrying out activities funded under the grant). 

"(D) Authority to limit number of applicants. — 
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as prohib- 
iting the Secretary from limiting the number of applicants 
for a grant under this paragraph. 

"(4) Accountability measures. — The Secretary shall de- 
velop accountability measures to ensure that the activities con- 
ducted using funds made available under this subsection ben- 
efit individuals who provide direct care and increase the sta- 
bility of the long-term care workforce. 
"(5) Definitions. — In this subsection: 

"(A) Community-based long-term care. — The term 
'community-based long-term care' has the meaning given 
such term by the Secretary. 

"(B) Eligible entity. — The term 'eligible entity' 
means the following: 

"(i) A long-term care facility. 

"(ii) A community-based long-term care entity (as 
defined by the Secretary). 
"(b) Certified EHR Technology Grant Program. — 

"(1) Grants authorized. — The Secretary is authorized to 
make grants to long-term care facilities for the purpose of as- 
sisting such entities in offsetting the costs related to pur- 
chasing, leasing, developing, and implementing certified EHR 
technology (as defined in section 1848(o)(4)) designed to im- 
prove patient safety and reduce adverse events and health care 
complications resulting from medication errors. 

"(2) Use of grant funds. — Funds provided under grants 
under this subsection may be used for any of the following: 

"(A) Purchasing, leasing, and installing computer soft- 
ware and hardware, including handheld computer tech- 
nologies. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6703\2041 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



734 



"(B) Making improvements to existing computer soft- 
ware and hardware. 

"(C) Making upgrades and other improvements to ex- 
isting computer software and hardware to enable e-pre- 
scribing. 

"(D) Providing education and training to eligible long- 
term care facility staff on the use of such technology to im- 
plement the electronic transmission of prescription and pa- 
tient information. 
"(3) Application. — 

"(A) In general. — To be eligible to receive a grant 
under this subsection, a long-term care facility shall sub- 
mit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such 
manner, and containing such information as the Secretary 
may require (which may include evidence of consultation 
with the State in which the long-term care facility is lo- 
cated with respect to carrying out activities funded under 
the grant). 

"(B) Authority to limit number of applicants. — 
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as prohib- 
iting the Secretary from limiting the number of applicants 
for a grant under this subsection. 

"(4) Participation in state health exchanges. — A long- 
term care facility that receives a grant under this subsection 
shall, where available, participate in activities conducted by a 
State or a qualified State-designated entity (as defined in sec- 
tion 3013(f) of the Public Health Service Act) under a grant 
under section 3013 of the Public Health Service Act to coordi- 
nate care and for other purposes determined appropriate by 
the Secretary. 

"(5) Accountability measures. — The Secretary shall de- 
velop accountability measures to ensure that the activities con- 
ducted using funds made available under this subsection help 
improve patient safety and reduce adverse events and health 
care complications resulting from medication errors. 
"(c) Adoption of Standards for Transactions Involving 
Clinical Data by Long-Term Care Facilities. — 

"(1) Standards and compatibility. — The Secretary shall 
adopt electronic standards for the exchange of clinical data by 
long-term care facilities, including, where available, standards 
for messaging and nomenclature. Standards adopted by the 
Secretary under the preceding sentence shall be compatible 
with standards established under part C of title XI, standards 
established under subsections (b)(2)(B)(i) and (e)(4) of section 
1860D-4, standards adopted under section 3004 of the Public 
Health Service Act, and general health information technology 
standards. 

"(2) Electronic submission of data to the sec- 
retary. — 

"(A) In general. — Not later than 10 years after the 
date of enactment of the Elder Justice Act of 2009, the 
Secretary shall have procedures in place to accept the op- 
tional electronic submission of clinical data by long-term 

June 9, 2010 



735 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6703\2042 SSA 



care facilities pursuant to the standards adopted under 
paragraph (1). 

"(B) Rule of construction. — Nothing in this sub- 
section shall be construed to require a long-term care facil- 
ity to submit clinical data electronically to the Secretary. 
"(3) Regulations. — The Secretary shall promulgate regu- 
lations to carry out this subsection. Such regulations shall re- 
quire a State, as a condition of the receipt of funds under this 
part, to conduct such data collection and reporting as the Sec- 
retary determines are necessary to satisfy the requirements of 
this subsection. 

"(d) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are author- 
ized to be appropriated to carry out this section — 
"(1) for fiscal year 2011, $20,000,000; 
"(2) for fiscal year 2012, $17,500,000; and 
"(3) for each of fiscal years 2013 and 2014, $15,000,000. 

"SEC. 2042 [42 U.S.C. 1397m-l]. ADULT PROTECTIVE SERVICES FUNC- 
TIONS AND GRANT PROGRAMS. 

"(a) Secretarial Responsibilities. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall ensure that the De- 
partment of Health and Human Services — 

"(A) provides funding authorized by this part to State 
and local adult protective services offices that investigate 
reports of the abuse, neglect, and exploitation of elders; 

"(B) collects and disseminates data annually relating 
to the abuse, exploitation, and neglect of elders in coordi- 
nation with the Department of Justice; 

"(C) develops and disseminates information on best 
practices regarding, and provides training on, carrying out 
adult protective services; 

"(D) conducts research related to the provision of adult 
protective services; and 

"(E) provides technical assistance to States and other 
entities that provide or fund the provision of adult protec- 
tive services, including through grants made under sub- 
sections (b) and (c). 

"(2) Authorization of appropriations. — There are au- 
thorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, 
$3,000,000 for fiscal year 2011 and $4,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2012 through 2014. 

"(b) Grants To Enhance the Provision of Adult Protec- 
tive Services. — 

"(1) Establishment. — There is established an adult pro- 
tective services grant program under which the Secretary shall 
annually award grants to States in the amounts calculated 
under paragraph (2) for the purposes of enhancing adult pro- 
tective services provided by States and local units of govern- 
ment. 

"(2) Amount of payment. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to the availability of appro- 
priations and subparagraphs (B) and (C), the amount paid 
to a State for a fiscal year under the program under this 
subsection shall equal the amount appropriated for that 
year to carry out this subsection multiplied by the percent- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. B703N2042 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



736 



age of the total number of elders who reside in the United 

States who reside in that State. 

"(B) Guaranteed minimum payment amount. — 

"(i) 50 states. — Subject to clause (ii), if the 
amount determined under subparagraph (A) for a 
State for a fiscal year is less than 0.75 percent of the 
amount appropriated for such year, the Secretary shall 
increase such determined amount so that the total 
amount paid under this subsection to the State for the 
year is equal to 0.75 percent of the amount so appro- 
priated. 

"(ii) Territories. — In the case of a State other 
than 1 of the 50 States, clause (i) shall be applied as 
if each reference to '0.75' were a reference to '0.1'. 
"(C) Pro rata reductions. — The Secretary shall 
make such pro rata reductions to the amounts described in 
subparagraph (A) as are necessary to comply with the re- 
quirements of subparagraph (B). 
"(3) Authorized activities. — 

"(A) Adult protective services. — Funds made avail- 
able pursuant to this subsection may only be used by 
States and local units of government to provide adult pro- 
tective services and may not be used for any other pur- 
pose. 

"(B) Use by agency. — Each State receiving funds pur- 
suant to this subsection shall provide such funds to the 
agency or unit of State government having legal responsi- 
bility for providing adult protective services within the 
State. 

"(C) Supplement not supplant. — Each State or local 
unit of government shall use funds made available pursu- 
ant to this subsection to supplement and not supplant 
other Federal, State, and local public funds expended to 
provide adult protective services in the State. 
"(4) State reports. — Each State receiving funds under 
this subsection shall submit to the Secretary, at such time and 
in such manner as the Secretary may require, a report on the 
number of elders served by the grants awarded under this sub- 
section. 

"(5) Authorization of appropriations. — There are au- 
thorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, 
$100,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2011 through 2014. 
"(c) State Demonstration Programs. — 

"(1) Establishment. — The Secretary shall award grants to 
States for the purposes of conducting demonstration programs 
in accordance with paragraph (2). 

"(2) Demonstration programs. — Funds made available 
pursuant to this subsection may be used by States and local 
units of government to conduct demonstration programs that 
test — 

"(A) training modules developed for the purpose of de- 
tecting or preventing elder abuse; 

"(B) methods to detect or prevent financial exploitation 
of elders; 

June 9, 2010 



737 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6703\2043 SSA 



"(C) methods to detect elder abuse; 

"(D) whether training on elder abuse forensics en- 
hances the detection of elder abuse by employees of the 
State or local unit of government; or 

"(E) other matters relating to the detection or preven- 
tion of elder abuse. 

"(3) Application. — To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this subsection, a State shall submit an application to the Sec- 
retary at such time, in such manner, and containing such in- 
formation as the Secretary may require. 

"(4) State reports. — Each State that receives funds under 
this subsection shall submit to the Secretary a report at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
Secretary may require on the results of the demonstration pro- 
gram conducted by the State using funds made available under 
this subsection. 

"(5) Authorization of appropriations. — There are au- 
thorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, 
$25,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2011 through 2014. 

"SEC. 2043 [42 U.S.C. 1397m-2]. LONG-TERM CARE OMBUDSMAN PRO- 
GRAM GRANTS AND TRAINING. 

"(a) Grants To Support the Long-Term Care Ombudsman 
Program. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall make grants to eli- 
gible entities with relevant expertise and experience in abuse 
and neglect in long-term care facilities or long-term care om- 
budsman programs and responsibilities, for the purpose of — 

"(A) improving the capacity of State long-term care 
ombudsman programs to respond to and resolve com- 
plaints about abuse and neglect; 

"(B) conducting pilot programs with State long-term 
care ombudsman offices or local ombudsman entities; and 
"(C) providing support for such State long-term care 
ombudsman programs and such pilot programs (such as 
through the establishment of a national long-term care 
ombudsman resource center). 

"(2) Authorization of appropriations. — There are au- 
thorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection — 
"(A) for fiscal year 2011, $5,000,000; 
"(B) for fiscal year 2012, $7,500,000; and 
"(C) for each of fiscal years 2013 and 2014, 
$10,000,000. 
"(b) Ombudsman Training Programs. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall establish programs 
to provide and improve ombudsman training with respect to 
elder abuse, neglect, and exploitation for national organiza- 
tions and State long-term care ombudsman programs. 

"(2) Authorization of appropriations. — There are au- 
thorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, for 
each of fiscal years 2011 through 2014, $10,000,000. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. B703N2044 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



738 



"SEC. 2044 [42 U.S.C. 1397m-3]. PROVISION OF INFORMATION REGARD- 
ING, AND EVALUATIONS OF, ELDER JUSTICE PROGRAMS. 

"(a) Provision of Information. — To be eligible to receive a 
grant under this part, an applicant shall agree — 

"(1) except as provided in paragraph (2), to provide the eli- 
gible entity conducting an evaluation under subsection (b) of 
the activities funded through the grant with such information 
as the eligible entity may require in order to conduct such 
evaluation; or 

"(2) in the case of an applicant for a grant under section 
2041(b), to provide the Secretary with such information as the 
Secretary may require to conduct an evaluation or audit under 
subsection (c). 

"(b) Use of Eligible Entities To Conduct Evaluations. — 

"(1) Evaluations required. — Except as provided in para- 
graph (2), the Secretary shall — 

"(A) reserve a portion (not less than 2 percent) of the 
funds appropriated with respect to each program carried 
out under this part; and 

"(B) use the funds reserved under subparagraph (A) to 
provide assistance to eligible entities to conduct evalua- 
tions of the activities funded under each program carried 
out under this part. 

"(2) Certified ehr technology grant program not in- 
cluded. — The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to 
the certified EHR technology grant program under section 
2041(b). 

"(3) Authorized activities. — A recipient of assistance de- 
scribed in paragraph (1)(B) shall use the funds made available 
through the assistance to conduct a validated evaluation of the 
effectiveness of the activities funded under a program carried 
out under this part. 

"(4) Applications. — To be eligible to receive assistance 
under paragraph (1)(B), an entity shall submit an application 
to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such information as the Secretary may require, including a 
proposal for the evaluation. 

"(5) Reports. — Not later than a date specified by the Sec- 
retary, an eligible entity receiving assistance under paragraph 
(1)(B) shall submit to the Secretary, the Committee on Ways 
and Means and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of 
the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Finance 
of the Senate a report containing the results of the evaluation 
conducted using such assistance together with such rec- 
ommendations as the entity determines to be appropriate. 
"(c) Evaluations and Audits of Certified EHR Technology 
Grant Program by the Secretary. — 

"(1) Evaluations. — The Secretary shall conduct an evalua- 
tion of the activities funded under the certified EHR tech- 
nology grant program under section 2041(b). Such evaluation 
shall include an evaluation of whether the funding provided 
under the grant is expended only for the purposes for which it 
is made. 

June 9, 2010 



739 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6703 



"(2) Audits. — The Secretary shall conduct appropriate au- 
dits of grants made under section 2041(b). 

"SEC. 2045 [42 U.S.C. 1397m-4]. REPORT. 

"Not later than October 1, 2014, the Secretary shall submit to 
the Elder Justice Coordinating Council established under section 
2021, the Committee on Ways and Means and the Committee on 
Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, and the 
Committee on Finance of the Senate a report — 

"(1) compiling, summarizing, and analyzing the informa- 
tion contained in the State reports submitted under sub- 
sections (b)(4) and (c)(4) of section 2042; and 

"(2) containing such recommendations for legislative or ad- 
ministrative action as the Secretary determines to be appro- 
priate. 

"SEC. 2046 [42 U.S.C. 1397m-5]. RULE OF CONSTRUCTION. 

"Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed as — 

"(1) limiting any cause of action or other relief related to 

obligations under this subtitle that is available under the law 

of any State, or political subdivision thereof; or 

"(2) creating a private cause of action for a violation of this 

subtitle.". 

(2) Option for state plan under program for tem- 
porary ASSISTANCE FOR NEEDY FAMILIES. — 

(A) In general.— Section 402(a)(1)(B) of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 602(a)(1)(B)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new clause: 

"(v) The document shall indicate whether the 
State intends to assist individuals to train for, seek, 
and maintain employment — 

"(I) providing direct care in a long-term care 

facility (as such terms are defined under section 

2011); or 

"(II) in other occupations related to elder care 
determined appropriate by the State for which the 
State identifies an unmet need for service per- 
sonnel, 

and, if so, shall include an overview of such assist- 
ance.". 

(B) Effective date. — The amendment made by sub- 
paragraph (A) shall take effect on January 1, 2011. 

(b) Protecting Residents of Long-Term Care Facilities. — 
[42 U.S.C. 1395i-3a] 

(1) National training institute for surveyors. — 

(A) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services shall enter into a contract with an entity for the 
purpose of establishing and operating a National Training 
Institute for Federal and State surveyors. Such Institute 
shall provide and improve the training of surveyors with 
respect to investigating allegations of abuse, neglect, and 
misappropriation of property in programs and long-term 
care facilities that receive payments under title XVIII or 
XIX of the Social Security Act. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6703 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



740 



(B) Activities carried out by the institute. — The 
contract entered into under subparagraph (A) shall require 
the Institute established and operated under such contract 
to carry out the following activities: 

(i) Assess the extent to which State agencies use 
specialized surveyors for the investigation of reported 
allegations of abuse, neglect, and misappropriation of 
property in such programs and long-term care facili- 
ties. 

(ii) Evaluate how the competencies of surveyors 
may be improved to more effectively investigate re- 
ported allegations of such abuse, neglect, and mis- 
appropriation of property, and provide feedback to 
Federal and State agencies on the evaluations con- 
ducted. 

(iii) Provide a national program of training, tools, 
and technical assistance to Federal and State sur- 
veyors on investigating reports of such abuse, neglect, 
and misappropriation of property. 

(iv) Develop and disseminate information on best 
practices for the investigation of such abuse, neglect, 
and misappropriation of property. 

(v) Assess the performance of State complaint in- 
take systems, in order to ensure that the intake of 
complaints occurs 24 hours per day, 7 days a week (in- 
cluding holidays). 

(vi) To the extent approved by the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services, provide a national 24 
hours per day, 7 days a week (including holidays), 
back-up system to State complaint intake systems in 
order to ensure optimum national responsiveness to 
complaints of such abuse, neglect, and misappropria- 
tion of property. 

(vii) Analyze and report annually on the following: 

(I) The total number and sources of com- 
plaints of such abuse, neglect, and misappropria- 
tion of property. 

(II) The extent to which such complaints are 
referred to law enforcement agencies. 

(III) General results of Federal and State in- 
vestigations of such complaints. 

(viii) Conduct a national study of the cost to State 
agencies of conducting complaint investigations of 
skilled nursing facilities and nursing facilities under 
sections 1819 and 1919, respectively, of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3; 1396r), and making rec- 
ommendations to the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services with respect to options to increase the effi- 
ciency and cost-effectiveness of such investigations. 

(C) Authorization. — There are authorized to be ap- 
propriated to carry out this paragraph, for the period of 
fiscal years 2011 through 2014, $12,000,000. 

(2) Grants to state survey agencies. — 

June 9, 2010 



741 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6703X1150 SSA 



(A) In general. — The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services shall make grants to State agencies that perform 
surveys of skilled nursing facilities or nursing facilities 
under sections 1819 or 1919, respectively, of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3; 1395r). 

(B) Use of funds. — A grant awarded under subpara- 
graph (A) shall be used for the purpose of designing and 
implementing complaint investigations systems that — 

(i) promptly prioritize complaints in order to en- 
sure a rapid response to the most serious and urgent 
complaints; 

(ii) respond to complaints with optimum effective- 
ness and timeliness; and 

(iii) optimize the collaboration between local au- 
thorities, consumers, and providers, including — 

(I) such State agency; 

(II) the State Long-Term Care Ombudsman; 

(III) local law enforcement agencies; 

(IV) advocacy and consumer organizations; 

(V) State aging units; 

(VI) Area Agencies on Aging; and 

(VII) other appropriate entities. 

(C) Authorization. — There are authorized to be ap- 
propriated to carry out this paragraph, for each of fiscal 
years 2011 through 2014, $5,000,000. 

(3) Reporting of crimes in federally funded long- 
term care facilities. — Part A of title XI of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1301 et seq.), as amended by section 6005, is 
amended by inserting after section 1150A the following new 
section: 

"reporting to law enforcement of crimes occurring in 
federally funded long-term care facilities 

"Sec. 1150B [42 U.S.C. 1320b-25]. (a) Determination and 
Notification. — 

"(1) Determination. — The owner or operator of each long- 
term care facility that receives Federal funds under this Act 
shall annually determine whether the facility received at least 
$10,000 in such Federal funds during the preceding year. 

"(2) Notification. — If the owner or operator determines 
under paragraph (1) that the facility received at least $10,000 
in such Federal funds during the preceding year, such owner 
or operator shall annually notify each covered individual (as 
defined in paragraph (3)) of that individual's obligation to com- 
ply with the reporting requirements described in subsection 
(b). 

"(3) Covered individual defined. — In this section, the 
term 'covered individual' means each individual who is an 
owner, operator, employee, manager, agent, or contractor of a 
long-term care facility that is the subject of a determination 
described in paragraph (1). 
"(b) Reporting Requirements. — 

"(1) In general. — Each covered individual shall report to 
the Secretary and 1 or more law enforcement entities for the 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6703U150 SSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



742 



political subdivision in which the facility is located any reason- 
able suspicion of a crime (as defined by the law of the applica- 
ble political subdivision) against any individual who is a resi- 
dent of, or is receiving care from, the facility. 

"(2) Timing. — If the events that cause the suspicion — 

"(A) result in serious bodily injury, the individual shall 
report the suspicion immediately, but not later than 2 
hours after forming the suspicion; and 

"(B) do not result in serious bodily injury, the indi- 
vidual shall report the suspicion not later than 24 hours 
after forming the suspicion. 
"(c) Penalties. — 

"(1) In general. — If a covered individual violates sub- 
section (b) — 

"(A) the covered individual shall be subject to a civil 
money penalty of not more than $200,000; and 

"(B) the Secretary may make a determination in the 
same proceeding to exclude the covered individual from 
participation in any Federal health care program (as de- 
fined in section 1128B(f)). 

"(2) Increased harm. — If a covered individual violates 
subsection (b) and the violation exacerbates the harm to the 
victim of the crime or results in harm to another individual — 
"(A) the covered individual shall be subject to a civil 
money penalty of not more than $300,000; and 

"(B) the Secretary may make a determination in the 
same proceeding to exclude the covered individual from 
participation in any Federal health care program (as de- 
fined in section 1128B(f)). 

"(3) Excluded individual. — During any period for which 
a covered individual is classified as an excluded individual 
under paragraph (1)(B) or (2)(B), a long-term care facility that 
employs such individual shall be ineligible to receive Federal 
funds under this Act. 

"(4) Extenuating circumstances. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary may take into ac- 
count the financial burden on providers with underserved 
populations in determining any penalty to be imposed 
under this subsection. 

"(B) Underserved population defined. — In this 
paragraph, the term 'underserved population' means the 
population of an area designated by the Secretary as an 
area with a shortage of elder justice programs or a popu- 
lation group designated by the Secretary as having a 
shortage of such programs. Such areas or groups des- 
ignated by the Secretary may include — 

"(i) areas or groups that are geographically iso- 
lated (such as isolated in a rural area); 

"(ii) racial and ethnic minority populations; and 
"(hi) populations underserved because of special 
needs (such as language barriers, disabilities, alien 
status, or age). 
"(d) Additional Penalties for Retaliation. — 

"(1) In general. — A long-term care facility may not — 

June 9, 2010 



743 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6703 



"(A) discharge, demote, suspend, threaten, harass, or 
deny a promotion or other employment-related benefit to 
an employee, or in any other manner discriminate against 
an employee in the terms and conditions of employment 
because of lawful acts done by the employee; or 

"(B) file a complaint or a report against a nurse or 
other employee with the appropriate State professional 
disciplinary agency because of lawful acts done by the 
nurse or employee, 
for making a report, causing a report to be made, or for taking 
steps in furtherance of making a report pursuant to subsection 

(b) (1). 

"(2) Penalties for retaliation. — If a long-term care facil- 
ity violates subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) the facil- 
ity shall be subject to a civil money penalty of not more than 
$200,000 or the Secretary may classify the entity as an ex- 
cluded entity for a period of 2 years pursuant to section 
1128(b), or both. 

"(3) Requirement to post notice. — Each long-term care 
facility shall post conspicuously in an appropriate location a 
sign (in a form specified by the Secretary) specifying the rights 
of employees under this section. Such sign shall include a 
statement that an employee may file a complaint with the Sec- 
retary against a long-term care facility that violates the provi- 
sions of this subsection and information with respect to the 
manner of filing such a complaint. 

"(e) Procedure. — The provisions of section 1128 A (other than 
subsections (a) and (b) and the second sentence of subsection (f)) 
shall apply to a civil money penalty or exclusion under this section 
in the same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or pro- 
ceeding under section 1128A(a). 

"(f) Definitions. — In this section, the terms 'elder justice', 
'long-term care facility', and 'law enforcement' have the meanings 
given those terms in section 2011.". 

(c) National Nurse Aide Registry. — 

(1) Definition of nurse aide. — In this subsection, the 
term "nurse aide" has the meaning given that term in sections 
1819(b)(5)(F) and 1919(b)(5)(F) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395i-3(b)(5)(F); 1396r(b)(5)(F)). 

(2) Study and report. — 

(A) In general. — The Secretary, in consultation with 
appropriate government agencies and private sector orga- 
nizations, shall conduct a study on establishing a national 
nurse aide registry. 

(B) Areas evaluated. — The study conducted under 
this subsection shall include an evaluation of — 

(i) who should be included in the registry; 

(ii) how such a registry would comply with Fed- 
eral and State privacy laws and regulations; 

(iii) how data would be collected for the registry; 

(iv) what entities and individuals would have ac- 
cess to the data collected; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6703 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



744 



(v) how the registry would provide appropriate in- 
formation regarding violations of Federal and State 
law by individuals included in the registry; 

(vi) how the functions of a national nurse aide reg- 
istry would be coordinated with the nationwide pro- 
gram for national and State background checks on di- 
rect patient access employees of long-term care facili- 
ties and providers under section 4301; and 

(vii) how the information included in State nurse 
aide registries developed and maintained under sec- 
tions 1819(e)(2) and 1919(e)(2) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(e)(2); 1396r(e)(2)(2)) would be 
provided as part of a national nurse aide registry. 

(C) Considerations. — In conducting the study and 
preparing the report required under this subsection, the 
Secretary shall take into consideration the findings and 
conclusions of relevant reports and other relevant re- 
sources, including the following: 

(i) The Department of Health and Human Serv- 
ices Office of Inspector General Report, Nurse Aide 
Registries: State Compliance and Practices (February 
2005). 

(ii) The General Accounting Office (now known as 
the Government Accountability Office) Report, Nurs- 
ing Homes: More Can Be Done to Protect Residents 
from Abuse (March 2002). 

(iii) The Department of Health and Human Serv- 
ices Office of the Inspector General Report, Nurse Aide 
Registries: Long-Term Care Facility Compliance and 
Practices (July 2005). 

(iv) The Department of Health and Human Serv- 
ices Health Resources and Services Administration Re- 
port, Nursing Aides, Home Health Aides, and Related 
Health Care Occupations — National and Local Work- 
force Shortages and Associated Data Needs (2004) (in 
particular with respect to chapter 7 and appendix F). 

(v) The 2001 Report to CMS from the School of 
Rural Public Health, Texas A&amp;M University, Pre- 
venting Abuse and Neglect in Nursing Homes: The 
Role of Nurse Aide Registries. 

(vi) Information included in State nurse aide reg- 
istries developed and maintained under sections 
1819(e)(2) and 1919(e)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395i-3(e)(2); 1396r(e)(2)(2)). 

(D) Report. — Not later than 18 months after the date 
of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the 
Elder Justice Coordinating Council established under sec- 
tion 2021 of the Social Security Act, as added by section 
1805(a), the Committee on Finance of the Senate, and the 
Committee on Ways and Means and the Committee on En- 
ergy and Commerce of the House of Representatives a re- 
port containing the findings and recommendations of the 
study conducted under this paragraph. 

June 9, 2010 



745 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 6801 



(E) Funding limitation. — Funding for the study con- 
ducted under this subsection shall not exceed $500,000. 

(3) Congressional action. — After receiving the report 
submitted by the Secretary under paragraph (2)(D), the Com- 
mittee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways 
and Means and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of 
the House of Representatives shall, as they deem appropriate, 
take action based on the recommendations contained in the re- 
port. 

(4) Authorization of appropriations. — There are author- 
ized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary for the pur- 
pose of carrying out this subsection. 

(d) Conforming Amendments. — 

(1) Title xx.— Title XX of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397 et seq.), as amended by section 6703(a), is amend- 
ed— 

(A) in the heading of section 2001, by striking "title" 
and inserting "subtitle"; and 

(B) in subtitle 1, by striking "this title" each place it 
appears and inserting "this subtitle". 

(2) Title iv.— Title IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
601 et seq.) is amended — 

(A) in section 404(d) — 

(i) in paragraphs (1)(A), (2)(A), and (3)(B), by in- 
serting "subtitle 1 of before "title XX" each place it 
appears; 

(ii) in the heading of paragraph (2), by inserting 
"subtitle 1 of" before "title xx"; and 

(hi) in the heading of paragraph (3)(B), by insert- 
ing "subtitle 1 of" before "title xx"; and 

(B) in sections 422(b), 471(a)(4), 472(h)(1), and 
473(b)(2), by inserting "subtitle 1 of before "title XX" each 
place it appears. 

(3) Title xl— Title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1301 et seq.) is amended — 

(A) in section 1128(h)(3)— 

(i) by inserting "subtitle 1 of before "title XX"; 

and 

(ii) by striking "such title" and inserting "such 
subtitle"; and 

(B) in section 1128A(i)(l), by inserting "subtitle 1 of 
before "title XX". 

Subtitle I — Sense of the Senate Regarding 
Medical Malpractice 

SEC. 6801. SENSE OF THE SENATE REGARDING MEDICAL MAL- 
PRACTICE. 

It is the sense of the Senate that — 

(1) health care reform presents an opportunity to address 
issues related to medical malpractice and medical liability in- 
surance; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 6801 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



746 



(2) States should be encouraged to develop and test alter- 
natives to the existing civil litigation system as a way of im- 
proving patient safety, reducing medical errors, encouraging 
the efficient resolution of disputes, increasing the availability 
of prompt and fair resolution of disputes, and improving access 
to liability insurance, while preserving an individual's right to 
seek redress in court; and 

(3) Congress should consider establishing a State dem- 
onstration program to evaluate alternatives to the existing civil 
litigation system with respect to the resolution of medical mal- 
practice claims. 



747 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 7002 



TITLE VII— IMPROVING ACCESS TO 
INNOVATIVE MEDICAL THERAPIES 

Subtitle A — Biologies Price Competition 
and Innovation 

SEC. 7001. SHORT TITLE. 

(a) In General. — This subtitle may be cited as the "Biologies 
Price Competition and Innovation Act of 2009". 

(b) Sense of the Senate. — It is the sense of the Senate that 
a biosimilars pathway balancing innovation and consumer interests 
should be established. 

SEC. 7002. APPROVAL PATHWAY FOR BIOSIMILAR BIOLOGICAL PROD- 
UCTS. 

(a) Licensure of Biological Products as Biosimilar or 
Interchangeable. — Section 351 of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 262) is amended— 

(1) in subsection (a)(1)(A), by inserting "under this sub- 
section or subsection (k)" after "biologies license"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following: 

"(k) Licensure of Biological Products as Biosimilar or 
Interchangeable. — 

"(1) In general. — Any person may submit an application 
for licensure of a biological product under this subsection. 
"(2) Content. — 

"(A) In general. — 

"(i) Required information. — An application sub- 
mitted under this subsection shall include information 
demonstrating that — 

"(I) the biological product is biosimilar to a 
reference product based upon data derived from — 
"(aa) analytical studies that demonstrate 
that the biological product is highly similar to 
the reference product notwithstanding minor 
differences in clinically inactive components; 

"(bb) animal studies (including the assess- 
ment of toxicity); and 

"(cc) a clinical study or studies (including 
the assessment of immunogenicity and phar- 
macokinetics or pharmacodynamics) that are 
sufficient to demonstrate safety, purity, and 
potency in 1 or more appropriate conditions of 
use for which the reference product is licensed 
and intended to be used and for which licen- 
sure is sought for the biological product; 
"(II) the biological product and reference prod- 
uct utilize the same mechanism or mechanisms of 
action for the condition or conditions of use pre- 
scribed, recommended, or suggested in the pro- 
posed labeling, but only to the extent the mecha- 
nism or mechanisms of" action are known for the 
reference product; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 7002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



748 



"(III) the condition or conditions of use pre- 
scribed, recommended, or suggested in the label- 
ing proposed for the biological product have been 
previously approved for the reference product; 

"(IV) the route of administration, the dosage 
form, and the strength of the biological product 
are the same as those of the reference product; 
and 

"(V) the facility in which the biological prod- 
uct is manufactured, processed, packed, or held 
meets standards designed to assure that the bio- 
logical product continues to be safe, pure, and po- 
tent. 

"(ii) Determination by secretary. — The Sec- 
retary may determine, in the Secretary's discretion, 
that an element described in clause (i)(I) is unneces- 
sary in an application submitted under this sub- 
section. 

"(hi) Additional information. — An application 
submitted under this subsection — 

"(I) shall include publicly-available informa- 
tion regarding the Secretary's previous determina- 
tion that the reference product is safe, pure, and 
potent; and 

"(II) may include any additional information 
in support of the application, including publicly- 
available information with respect to the reference 
product or another biological product. 
"(B) Interchangeability. — An application (or a sup- 
plement to an application) submitted under this subsection 
may include information demonstrating that the biological 
product meets the standards described in paragraph (4). 
"(3) Evaluation by secretary. — Upon review of an appli- 
cation (or a supplement to an application) submitted under this 
subsection, the Secretary shall license the biological product 
under this subsection if — 

"(A) the Secretary determines that the information 
submitted in the application (or the supplement) is suffi- 
cient to show that the biological product — 

"(i) is biosimilar to the reference product; or 
"(ii) meets the standards described in paragraph 
(4), and therefore is interchangeable with the ref- 
erence product; and 

"(B) the applicant (or other appropriate person) con- 
sents to the inspection of the facility that is the subject of 
the application, in accordance with subsection (c). 
"(4) Safety standards for determining interchange- 
ability. — Upon review of an application submitted under this 
subsection or any supplement to such application, the Sec- 
retary shall determine the biological product to be interchange- 
able with the reference product if the Secretary determines 
that the information submitted in the application (or a supple- 
ment to such application) is sufficient to show that — 
"(A) the biological product — 

June 9, 2010 



749 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 7002 



"(i) is biosimilar to the reference product; and 
"(ii) can be expected to produce the same clinical 

result as the reference product in any given patient; 

and 

"(B) for a biological product that is administered more 
than once to an individual, the risk in terms of safety or 
diminished efficacy of alternating or switching between 
use of the biological product and the reference product is 
not greater than the risk of using the reference product 
without such alternation or switch. 
"(5) General rules. — 

"(A) One reference product per application. — A 
biological product, in an application submitted under this 
subsection, may not be evaluated against more than 1 ref- 
erence product. 

"(B) Review. — An application submitted under this 
subsection shall be reviewed by the division within the 
Food and Drug Administration that is responsible for the 
review and approval of the application under which the 
reference product is licensed. 

"(C) Risk evaluation and mitigation strategies. — 
The authority of the Secretary with respect to risk evalua- 
tion and mitigation strategies under the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act shall apply to biological products 
licensed under this subsection in the same manner as such 
authority applies to biological products licensed under sub- 
section (a). 

"(6) Exclusivity for first interchangeable biological 
product. — Upon review of an application submitted under this 
subsection relying on the same reference product for which a 
prior biological product has received a determination of inter- 
changeability for any condition of use, the Secretary shall not 
make a determination under paragraph (4) that the second or 
subsequent biological product is interchangeable for any condi- 
tion of use until the earlier of — 

"(A) 1 year after the first commercial marketing of the 
first interchangeable biosimilar biological product to be ap- 
proved as interchangeable for that reference product; 
"(B) 18 months after— 

"(i) a final court decision on all patents in suit in 
an action instituted under subsection (1)(6) against the 
applicant that submitted the application for the first 
approved interchangeable biosimilar biological prod- 
uct; or 

"(ii) the dismissal with or without prejudice of an 
action instituted under subsection (1)(6) against the 
applicant that submitted the application for the first 
approved interchangeable biosimilar biological prod- 
uct; or 

"(C)(i) 42 months after approval of the first inter- 
changeable biosimilar biological product if the applicant 
that submitted such application has been sued under sub- 
section (1)(6) and such litigation is still ongoing within 
such 42-month period; or 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 7002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



750 



"(ii) 18 months after approval of the first interchange- 
able biosimilar biological product if the applicant that sub- 
mitted such application has not been sued under sub- 
section (1)(6). 

For purposes of this paragraph, the term 'final court decision' 
means a final decision of a court from which no appeal (other 
than a petition to the United States Supreme Court for a writ 
of certiorari) has been or can be taken. 

"(7) Exclusivity for reference product. — 

"(A) Effective date of biosimilar application ap- 
proval. — Approval of an application under this subsection 
may not be made effective by the Secretary until the date 
that is 12 years after the date on which the reference prod- 
uct was first licensed under subsection (a). 

"(B) Filing period. — An application under this sub- 
section may not be submitted to the Secretary until the 
date that is 4 years after the date on which the reference 
product was first licensed under subsection (a). 

"(C) First licensure. — Subparagraphs (A) and (B) 
shall not apply to a license for or approval of — 

"(i) a supplement for the biological product that is 
the reference product; or 

"(ii) a subsequent application filed by the same 
sponsor or manufacturer of the biological product that 
is the reference product (or a licensor, predecessor in 
interest, or other related entity) for — 

"(I) a change (not including a modification to 
the structure of the biological product) that results 
in a new indication, route of administration, dos- 
ing schedule, dosage form, delivery system, deliv- 
ery device, or strength; or 

"(II) a modification to the structure of the bio- 
logical product that does not result in a change in 
safety, purity, or potency. 
"(8) Guidance documents. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary may, after oppor- 
tunity for public comment, issue guidance in accordance, 
except as provided in subparagraph (B)(i), with section 
701(h) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act with 
respect to the licensure of a biological product under this 
subsection. Any such guidance may be general or specific. 
"(B) Public comment. — 

"(i) In general. — The Secretary shall provide the 
public an opportunity to comment on any proposed 
guidance issued under subparagraph (A) before 
issuing final guidance. 

"(ii) Input regarding most valuable guid- 
ance. — The Secretary shall establish a process 
through which the public may provide the Secretary 
with input regarding priorities for issuing guidance. 
"(C) NO REQUIREMENT FOR APPLICATION CONSIDER- 
ATION. — The issuance (or non-issuance) of guidance under 
subparagraph (A) shall not preclude the review of, or ac- 
tion on, an application submitted under this subsection. 

June 9, 2010 



751 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 7002 



"(D) Requirement for product class-specific guid- 
ance. — If the Secretary issues product class-specific guid- 
ance under subparagraph (A), such guidance shall include 
a description of — 

"(i) the criteria that the Secretary will use to de- 
termine whether a biological product is highly similar 
to a reference product in such product class; and 

"(ii) the criteria, if available, that the Secretary 
will use to determine whether a biological product 
meets the standards described in paragraph (4). 
"(E) Certain product classes. — 

"(i) Guidance. — The Secretary may indicate in a 
guidance document that the science and experience, as 
of the date of such guidance, with respect to a product 
or product class (not including any recombinant pro- 
tein) does not allow approval of an application for a li- 
cense as provided under this subsection for such prod- 
uct or product class. 

"(ii) Modification or reversal. — The Secretary 
may issue a subsequent guidance document under 
subparagraph (A) to modify or reverse a guidance doc- 
ument under clause (i). 

"(hi) NO EFFECT ON ABILITY TO DENY LICENSE. — 

Clause (i) shall not be construed to require the Sec- 
retary to approve a product with respect to which the 
Secretary has not indicated in a guidance document 
that the science and experience, as described in clause 
(i), does not allow approval of such an application. 
"(1) Patents. — 

"(1) Confidential access to subsection (k) applica- 
tion. — 

"(A) Application of paragraph. — Unless otherwise 
agreed to by a person that submits an application under 
subsection (k) (referred to in this subsection as the 'sub- 
section (k) applicant') and the sponsor of the application 
for the reference product (referred to in this subsection as 
the 'reference product sponsor'), the provisions of this 
paragraph shall apply to the exchange of information de- 
scribed in this subsection. 
"(B) In general. — 

"(i) Provision of confidential information. — 
When a subsection (k) applicant submits an applica- 
tion under subsection (k), such applicant shall provide 
to the persons described in clause (ii), subject to the 
terms of this paragraph, confidential access to the in- 
formation required to be produced pursuant to para- 
graph (2) and any other information that the sub- 
section (k) applicant determines, in its sole discretion, 
to be appropriate (referred to in this subsection as the 
'confidential information'). 

"(ii) Recipients of information. — The persons 
described in this clause are the following: 

"(I) Outside counsel. — One or more attor- 
neys designated by the reference product sponsor 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 7002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



752 



who are employees of an entity other than the ref- 
erence product sponsor (referred to in this para- 
graph as the 'outside counsel'), provided that such 
attorneys do not engage, formally or informally, in 
patent prosecution relevant or related to the ref- 
erence product. 

"(II) In-house counsel. — One attorney that 
represents the reference product sponsor who is 
an employee of the reference product sponsor, pro- 
vided that such attorney does not engage, formally 
or informally, in patent prosecution relevant or re- 
lated to the reference product, 
"(in) Patent owner access. — A representative of 
the owner of a patent exclusively licensed to a ref- 
erence product sponsor with respect to the reference 
product and who has retained a right to assert the 
patent or participate in litigation concerning the pat- 
ent may be provided the confidential information, pro- 
vided that the representative informs the reference 
product sponsor and the subsection (k) applicant of his 
or her agreement to be subject to the confidentiality 
provisions set forth in this paragraph, including those 
under clause (ii). 

"(C) Limitation on disclosure. — No person that re- 
ceives confidential information pursuant to subparagraph 
(B) shall disclose any confidential information to any other 
person or entity, including the reference product sponsor 
employees, outside scientific consultants, or other outside 
counsel retained by the reference product sponsor, without 
the prior written consent of the subsection (k) applicant, 
which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 

"(D) Use of confidential information. — Confiden- 
tial information shall be used for the sole and exclusive 
purpose of determining, with respect to each patent as- 
signed to or exclusively licensed by the reference product 
sponsor, whether a claim of patent infringement could rea- 
sonably be asserted if the subsection (k) applicant engaged 
in the manufacture, use, offering for sale, sale, or importa- 
tion into the United States of the biological product that 
is the subject of the application under subsection (k). 

"(E) Ownership of confidential information. — The 
confidential information disclosed under this paragraph is, 
and shall remain, the property of the subsection (k) appli- 
cant. By providing the confidential information pursuant 
to this paragraph, the subsection (k) applicant does not 
provide the reference product sponsor or the outside coun- 
sel any interest in or license to use the confidential infor- 
mation, for purposes other than those specified in subpara- 
graph (D). 

"(F) Effect of infringement action. — In the event 
that the reference product sponsor files a patent infringe- 
ment suit, the use of confidential information shall con- 
tinue to be governed by the terms of this paragraph until 
such time as a court enters a protective order regarding 

June 9, 2010 



753 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 7002 



the information. Upon entry of such order, the subsection 
(k) applicant may redesignate confidential information in 
accordance with the terms of that order. No confidential 
information shall be included in any publicly-available 
complaint or other pleading. In the event that the ref- 
erence product sponsor does not file an infringement action 
by the date specified in paragraph (6), the reference prod- 
uct sponsor shall return or destroy all confidential infor- 
mation received under this paragraph, provided that if the 
reference product sponsor opts to destroy such information, 
it will confirm destruction in writing to the subsection (k) 
applicant. 

"(G) Rule of construction. — Nothing in this para- 
graph shall be construed — 

"(i) as an admission by the subsection (k) appli- 
cant regarding the validity, enforceability, or infringe- 
ment of any patent; or 

"(ii) as an agreement or admission by the sub- 
section (k) applicant with respect to the competency, 
relevance, or materiality of any confidential informa- 
tion. 

"(H) Effect of violation. — The disclosure of any con- 
fidential information in violation of this paragraph shall be 
deemed to cause the subsection (k) applicant to suffer ir- 
reparable harm for which there is no adequate legal rem- 
edy and the court shall consider immediate injunctive re- 
lief to be an appropriate and necessary remedy for any vio- 
lation or threatened violation of this paragraph. 
"(2) Subsection (k) application information. — Not later 
than 20 days after the Secretary notifies the subsection (k) ap- 
plicant that the application has been accepted for review, the 
subsection (k) applicant — 

"(A) shall provide to the reference product sponsor a 
copy of the application submitted to the Secretary under 
subsection (k), and such other information that describes 
the process or processes used to manufacture the biological 
product that is the subject of such application; and 

"(B) may provide to the reference product sponsor ad- 
ditional information requested by or on behalf of the ref- 
erence product sponsor. 
"(3) List and description of patents. — 

"(A) List by reference product sponsor. — Not later 
than 60 days after the receipt of the application and infor- 
mation under paragraph (2), the reference product sponsor 
shall provide to the subsection (k) applicant — 

"(i) a list of patents for which the reference prod- 
uct sponsor believes a claim of patent infringement 
could reasonably be asserted by the reference product 
sponsor, or by a patent owner that has granted an ex- 
clusive license to the reference product sponsor with 
respect to the reference product, if a person not li- 
censed by the reference product sponsor engaged in 
the making, using, offering to sell, selling, or import- 
ing into the United States of the biological product 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 7002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



754 



that is the subject of the subsection (k) application; 
and 

"(ii) an identification of the patents on such list 
that the reference product sponsor would be prepared 
to license to the subsection (k) applicant. 
"(B) List and description by subsection (k) appli- 
cant. — Not later than 60 days after receipt of the list 
under subparagraph (A), the subsection (k) applicant — 

"(i) may provide to the reference product sponsor 
a list of patents to which the subsection (k) applicant 
believes a claim of patent infringement could reason- 
ably be asserted by the reference product sponsor if a 
person not licensed by the reference product sponsor 
engaged in the making, using, offering to sell, selling, 
or importing into the United States of the biological 
product that is the subject of the subsection (k) appli- 
cation; 

"(ii) shall provide to the reference product sponsor, 
with respect to each patent listed by the reference 
product sponsor under subparagraph (A) or listed by 
the subsection (k) applicant under clause (i) — 

"(I) a detailed statement that describes, on a 
claim by claim basis, the factual and legal basis of 
the opinion of the subsection (k) applicant that 
such patent is invalid, unenforceable, or will not 
be infringed by the commercial marketing of the 
biological product that is the subject of the sub- 
section (k) application; or 

"(II) a statement that the subsection (k) appli- 
cant does not intend to begin commercial mar- 
keting of the biological product before the date 
that such patent expires; and 
"(hi) shall provide to the reference product sponsor 
a response regarding each patent identified by the ref- 
erence product sponsor under subparagraph (A)(ii). 
"(C) Description by reference product sponsor. — 
Not later than 60 days after receipt of the list and state- 
ment under subparagraph (B), the reference product spon- 
sor shall provide to the subsection (k) applicant a detailed 
statement that describes, with respect to each patent de- 
scribed in subparagraph (B)(ii)(I), on a claim by claim 
basis, the factual and legal basis of the opinion of the ref- 
erence product sponsor that such patent will be infringed 
by the commercial marketing of the biological product that 
is the subject of the subsection (k) application and a re- 
sponse to the statement concerning validity and enforce- 
ability provided under subparagraph (B)(ii)(I). 
"(4) Patent resolution negotiations. — 

"(A) In general. — After receipt by the subsection (k) 
applicant of the statement under paragraph (3)(C), the ref- 
erence product sponsor and the subsection (k) applicant 
shall engage in good faith negotiations to agree on which, 
if any, patents listed under paragraph (3) by the sub- 
section (k) applicant or the reference product sponsor shall 

June 9, 2010 



755 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 7002 



be the subject of an action for patent infringement under 
paragraph (6). 

"(B) Failure to reach agreement. — If, within 15 
days of beginning negotiations under subparagraph (A), 
the subsection (k) applicant and the reference product 
sponsor fail to agree on a final and complete list of which, 
if any, patents listed under paragraph (3) by the sub- 
section (k) applicant or the reference product sponsor shall 
be the subject of an action for patent infringement under 
paragraph (6), the provisions of paragraph (5) shall apply 
to the parties. 

"(5) Patent resolution if no agreement. — 

"(A) Number of patents. — The subsection (k) appli- 
cant shall notify the reference product sponsor of the num- 
ber of patents that such applicant will provide to the ref- 
erence product sponsor under subparagraph (B)(i)(I). 
"(B) Exchange of patent lists. — 

"(i) In general. — On a date agreed to by the sub- 
section (k) applicant and the reference product spon- 
sor, but in no case later than 5 days after the sub- 
section (k) applicant notifies the reference product 
sponsor under subparagraph (A), the subsection (k) 
applicant and the reference product sponsor shall si- 
multaneously exchange — 

"(I) the list of patents that the subsection (k) 
applicant believes should be the subject of an ac- 
tion for patent infringement under paragraph (6); 
and 

"(II) the list of patents, in accordance with 
clause (ii), that the reference product sponsor be- 
lieves should be the subject of an action for patent 
infringement under paragraph (6). 
"(ii) Number of patents listed by reference 

PRODUCT SPONSOR. — 

"(I) In general. — Subject to subclause (II), 
the number of patents listed by the reference 
product sponsor under clause (i)(II) may not ex- 
ceed the number of patents listed by the sub- 
section (k) applicant under clause (i)(I). 

"(II) Exception. — If a subsection (k) applicant 
does not list any patent under clause (i)(I), the ref- 
erence product sponsor may list 1 patent under 
clause (i)(II). 
"(6) Immediate patent infringement action. — 

"(A) Action if agreement on patent list. — If the 
subsection (k) applicant and the reference product sponsor 
agree on patents as described in paragraph (4), not later 
than 30 days after such agreement, the reference product 
sponsor shall bring an action for patent infringement with 
respect to each such patent. 

"(B) Action if no agreement on patent list. — If the 
provisions of paragraph (5) apply to the parties as de- 
scribed in paragraph (4)(B), not later than 30 days after 
the exchange of lists under paragraph (5)(B), the reference 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 7002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



756 



product sponsor shall bring an action for patent infringe- 
ment with respect to each patent that is included on such 
lists. 

"(C) Notification and publication of complaint. — 
"(i) Notification to secretary. — Not later than 
30 days after a complaint is served to a subsection (k) 
applicant in an action for patent infringement de- 
scribed under this paragraph, the subsection (k) appli- 
cant shall provide the Secretary with notice and a 
copy of such complaint. 

"(ii) Publication by secretary. — The Secretary 
shall publish in the Federal Register notice of a com- 
plaint received under clause (i). 
"(7) Newly issued or licensed patents. — In the case of 
a patent that — 

"(A) is issued to, or exclusively licensed by, the ref- 
erence product sponsor after the date that the reference 
product sponsor provided the list to the subsection (k) ap- 
plicant under paragraph (3)(A); and 

"(B) the reference product sponsor reasonably believes 
that, due to the issuance of such patent, a claim of patent 
infringement could reasonably be asserted by the reference 
product sponsor if a person not licensed by the reference 
product sponsor engaged in the making, using, offering to 
sell, selling, or importing into the United States of the bio- 
logical product that is the subject of the subsection (k) ap- 
plication, 

not later than 30 days after such issuance or licensing, the ref- 
erence product sponsor shall provide to the subsection (k) ap- 
plicant a supplement to the list provided by the reference prod- 
uct sponsor under paragraph (3)(A) that includes such patent, 
not later than 30 days after such supplement is provided, the 
subsection (k) applicant shall provide a statement to the ref- 
erence product sponsor in accordance with paragraph (3)(B), 
and such patent shall be subject to paragraph (8). 

"(8) Notice of commercial marketing and preliminary 
injunction. — 

"(A) Notice of commercial marketing. — The sub- 
section (k) applicant shall provide notice to the reference 
product sponsor not later than 180 days before the date of 
the first commercial marketing of the biological product li- 
censed under subsection (k). 

"(B) Preliminary injunction. — After receiving the 
notice under subparagraph (A) and before such date of the 
first commercial marketing of such biological product, the 
reference product sponsor may seek a preliminary injunc- 
tion prohibiting the subsection (k) applicant from engaging 
in the commercial manufacture or sale of such biological 
product until the court decides the issue of patent validity, 
enforcement, and infringement with respect to any patent 
that is — 

"(i) included in the list provided by the reference 
product sponsor under paragraph (3)(A) or in the list 

June 9, 2010 



757 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 7002 



provided by the subsection (k) applicant under para- 
graph (3)(B); and 

"(ii) not included, as applicable, on — 

"(I) the list of patents described in paragraph 

(4); or 

"(II) the lists of patents described in para- 
graph (5)(B). 

"(C) Reasonable cooperation. — If the reference 
product sponsor has sought a preliminary injunction under 
subparagraph (B), the reference product sponsor and the 
subsection (k) applicant shall reasonably cooperate to expe- 
dite such further discovery as is needed in connection with 
the preliminary injunction motion. 
"(9) Limitation on declaratory judgment action. — 

"(A) Subsection (k) application provided. — If a sub- 
section (k) applicant provides the application and informa- 
tion required under paragraph (2)(A), neither the reference 
product sponsor nor the subsection (k) applicant may, prior 
to the date notice is received under paragraph (8)(A), bring 
any action under section 2201 of title 28, United States 
Code, for a declaration of infringement, validity, or en- 
forceability of any patent that is described in clauses (i) 
and (ii) of paragraph (8)(B). 

"(B) Subsequent failure to act by subsection (k) 
applicant. — If a subsection (k) applicant fails to complete 
an action required of the subsection (k) applicant under 
paragraph (3)(B)(ii), paragraph (5), paragraph (6)(C)(i), 
paragraph (7), or paragraph (8)(A), the reference product 
sponsor, but not the subsection (k) applicant, may bring an 
action under section 2201 of title 28, United States Code, 
for a declaration of infringement, validity, or enforceability 
of any patent included in the list described in paragraph 
(3)(A), including as provided under paragraph (7). 

"(C) Subsection (k) application not provided. — If a 
subsection (k) applicant fails to provide the application and 
information required under paragraph (2)(A), the reference 
product sponsor, but not the subsection (k) applicant, may 
bring an action under section 2201 of title 28, United 
States Code, for a declaration of infringement, validity, or 
enforceability of any patent that claims the biological prod- 
uct or a use of the biological product.", 
(b) Definitions. — Section 351(i) of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 262(i)) is amended— 

(1) by striking "In this section, the term 'biological product' 
means" and inserting the following: "In this section: 

"(1) The term 'biological product' means"; 

(2) in paragraph (1), as so designated, by inserting "protein 
(except any chemically synthesized polypeptide)," after "aller- 
genic product,"; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following: 

"(2) The term 'biosimilar' or 'biosimilarity', in reference to 
a biological product that is the subject of an application under 
subsection (k), means — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 7002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



758 



"(A) that the biological product is highly similar to the 
reference product notwithstanding minor differences in 
clinically inactive components; and 

"(B) there are no clinically meaningful differences be- 
tween the biological product and the reference product in 
terms of the safety, purity, and potency of the product. 
"(3) The term 'interchangeable' or 'interchangeability', in 
reference to a biological product that is shown to meet the 
standards described in subsection (k)(4), means that the bio- 
logical product may be substituted for the reference product 
without the intervention of the health care provider who pre- 
scribed the reference product. 

"(4) The term 'reference product' means the single biologi- 
cal product licensed under subsection (a) against which a bio- 
logical product is evaluated in an application submitted under 
subsection (k).". 

(c) Conforming Amendments Relating to Patents. — 

(1) Patents.— Section 271(e) of title 35, United States 
Code, is amended — 

(A) in paragraph (2) — 

(i) in subparagraph (A), by striking "or" at the 

end; 

(ii) in subparagraph (B), by adding "or" at the end; 

and 

(iii) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the fol- 
lowing: 

"(C)(i) with respect to a patent that is identified in the list 
of patents described in section 351(1)(3) of the Public Health 
Service Act (including as provided under section 351(1)(7) of 
such Act), an application seeking approval of a biological prod- 
uct, or 

"(ii) if the applicant for the application fails to provide the 
application and information required under section 351(1)(2)(A) 
of such Act, an application seeking approval of a biological 
product for a patent that could be identified pursuant to sec- 
tion 351(l)(3)(A)(i) of such Act,"; and 

(iv) in the matter following subparagraph (C) (as 
added by clause (iii)), by striking "or veterinary bio- 
logical product" and inserting ", veterinary biological 
product, or biological product"; 

(B) in paragraph (4) — 

(i) in subparagraph (B), by — 

(I) striking "or veterinary biological product" 
and inserting ", veterinary biological product, or 
biological product"; and 

(II) striking "and" at the end; 

(ii) in subparagraph (C), by — 

(I) striking "or veterinary biological product" 
and inserting ", veterinary biological product, or 
biological product"; and 

(II) striking the period and inserting ", and"; 

(iii) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the fol- 
lowing: 

June 9, 2010 



759 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 7002 



"(D) the court shall order a permanent injunction prohib- 
iting any infringement of the patent by the biological product 
involved in the infringement until a date which is not earlier 
than the date of the expiration of the patent that has been in- 
fringed under paragraph (2)(C), provided the patent is the sub- 
ject of a final court decision, as defined in section 351(k)(6) of 
the Public Health Service Act, in an action for infringement of 
the patent under section 351(1)(6) of such Act, and the biologi- 
cal product has not yet been approved because of section 
351(k)(7) of such Act."; and 

(iv) in the matter following subparagraph (D) (as 
added by clause (hi)), by striking "and (C)" and insert- 
ing "(C), and (D)"; and 
(C) by adding at the end the following: 
"(6)(A) Subparagraph (B) applies, in lieu of paragraph (4), in 
the case of a patent — 

"(i) that is identified, as applicable, in the list of patents 
described in section 351(1)(4) of the Public Health Service Act 
or the lists of patents described in section 351(1)(5)(B) of such 
Act with respect to a biological product; and 

"(ii) for which an action for infringement of the patent with 
respect to the biological product — 

"(I) was brought after the expiration of the 30-day pe- 
riod described in subparagraph (A) or (B), as applicable, of 
section 351(1)(6) of such Act; or 

"(II) was brought before the expiration of the 30-day 
period described in subclause (I), but which was dismissed 
without prejudice or was not prosecuted to judgment in 
good faith. 

"(B) In an action for infringement of a patent described in sub- 
paragraph (A), the sole and exclusive remedy that may be granted 
by a court, upon a finding that the making, using, offering to sell, 
selling, or importation into the United States of the biological prod- 
uct that is the subject of the action infringed the patent, shall be 
a reasonable royalty. 

"(C) The owner of a patent that should have been included in 
the list described in section 351(1)(3)(A) of the Public Health Serv- 
ice Act, including as provided under section 351(1)(7) of such Act for 
a biological product, but was not timely included in such list, may 
not bring an action under this section for infringement of the pat- 
ent with respect to the biological product.". 

(2) Conforming amendment under title 28. — Section 
2201(b) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by insert- 
ing before the period the following: ", or section 351 of the Pub- 
lic Health Service Act". 

(d) Conforming Amendments Under the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act. — 

(1) Content and review of applications. — Section 
505(b)(5)(B) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
U.S.C. 355(b)(5)(B)) is amended by inserting before the period 
at the end of the first sentence the following: "or, with respect 
to an applicant for approval of a biological product under sec- 
tion 351(k) of the Public Health Service Act, any necessary 
clinical study or studies". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 7002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



760 



(2) New active ingredient. — Section 505B of the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355c) is amended by 
adding at the end the following: 
"(n) New Active Ingredient. — 

"(1) NON- INTERCHANGEABLE BIOSIMILAR BIOLOGICAL PROD- 
UCT. — A biological product that is biosimilar to a reference 
product under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act, 
and that the Secretary has not determined to meet the stand- 
ards described in subsection (k)(4) of such section for inter- 
changeability with the reference product, shall be considered to 
have a new active ingredient under this section. 

"(2) Interchangeable biosimilar biological product. — 
A biological product that is interchangeable with a reference 
product under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act 
shall not be considered to have a new active ingredient under 
this section.". 

(e) Products Previously Approved Under Section 505. — 

(1) Requirement to follow section 351. — Except as pro- 
vided in paragraph (2), an application for a biological product 
shall be submitted under section 351 of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262) (as amended by this Act). 

(2) Exception. — An application for a biological product 
may be submitted under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, 
and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355) if— 

(A) such biological product is in a product class for 
which a biological product in such product class is the sub- 
ject of an application approved under such section 505 not 
later than the date of enactment of this Act; and 

(B) such application — 

(i) has been submitted to the Secretary of Health 
and Human Services (referred to in this subtitle as the 
"Secretary") before the date of enactment of this Act; 
or 

(ii) is submitted to the Secretary not later than 
the date that is 10 years after the date of enactment 
of this Act. 

(3) Limitation. — Notwithstanding paragraph (2), an appli- 
cation for a biological product may not be submitted under sec- 
tion 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
U.S.C. 355) if there is another biological product approved 
under subsection (a) of section 351 of the Public Health Service 
Act that could be a reference product with respect to such ap- 
plication (within the meaning of such section 351) if such ap- 
plication were submitted under subsection (k) of such section 
351. 

(4) Deemed approved under section 351. — An approved 
application for a biological product under section 505 of the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355) shall be 
deemed to be a license for the biological product under such 
section 351 on the date that is 10 years after the date of enact- 
ment of this Act. 

(5) Definitions. — For purposes of this subsection, the 
term "biological product" has the meaning given such term 

June 9, 2010 



761 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 7002 



under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 

262) (as amended by this Act). 

(f) Follow-on Biologics User Fees.— 

(1) Development of user fees for biosimilar biologi- 
cal products. — 

(A) In general. — Beginning not later than October 1, 
2010, the Secretary shall develop recommendations to 
present to Congress with respect to the goals, and plans 
for meeting the goals, for the process for the review of bio- 
similar biological product applications submitted under 
section 351(k) of the Public Health Service Act (as added 
by this Act) for the first 5 fiscal years after fiscal year 
2012. In developing such recommendations, the Secretary 
shall consult with — 

(i) the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, 
and Pensions of the Senate; 

(ii) the Committee on Energy and Commerce of 
the House of Representatives; 

(iii) scientific and academic experts; 

(iv) health care professionals; 

(v) representatives of patient and consumer advo- 
cacy groups; and 

(vi) the regulated industry. 

(B) Public review of recommendations. — After ne- 
gotiations with the regulated industry, the Secretary 
shall— 

(i) present the recommendations developed under 
subparagraph (A) to the Congressional committees 
specified in such subparagraph; 

(ii) publish such recommendations in the Federal 
Register; 

(iii) provide for a period of 30 days for the public 
to provide written comments on such recommenda- 
tions; 

(iv) hold a meeting at which the public may 
present its views on such recommendations; and 

(v) after consideration of such public views and 
comments, revise such recommendations as necessary. 

(C) Transmittal of recommendations. — Not later 
than January 15, 2012, the Secretary shall transmit to 
Congress the revised recommendations under subpara- 
graph (B), a summary of the views and comments received 
under such subparagraph, and any changes made to the 
recommendations in response to such views and comments. 

(2) Establishment of user fee program. — It is the sense 
of the Senate that, based on the recommendations transmitted 
to Congress by the Secretary pursuant to paragraph (1)(C), 
Congress should authorize a program, effective on October 1, 
2012, for the collection of user fees relating to the submission 
of biosimilar biological product applications under section 
351(k) of the Public Health Service Act (as added by this Act). 

(3) Transitional provisions for user fees for bio- 
similar BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 7002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



762 



(A) Application of the prescription drug user fee 
provisions— Section 735(1)(B) of the Federal Food, Drug, 
and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 379g(l)(B)) is amended by 
striking "section 351" and inserting "subsection (a) or (k) 
of section 351". 

(B) Evaluation of costs of reviewing biosimilar 
biological product applications. — During the period be- 
ginning on the date of enactment of this Act and ending 
on October 1, 2010, the Secretary shall collect and evalu- 
ate data regarding the costs of reviewing applications for 
biological products submitted under section 351(k) of the 
Public Health Service Act (as added by this Act) during 
such period. 

(C) Audit. — 

(i) In general. — On the date that is 2 years after 
first receiving a user fee applicable to an application 
for a biological product under section 351(k) of the 
Public Health Service Act (as added by this Act), and 
on a biennial basis thereafter until October 1, 2013, 
the Secretary shall perform an audit of the costs of re- 
viewing such applications under such section 351(k). 
Such an audit shall compare — 

(I) the costs of reviewing such applications 
under such section 351(k) to the amount of the 
user fee applicable to such applications; and 

(II) (aa) such ratio determined under subclause 
(I); to 

(bb) the ratio of the costs of reviewing applica- 
tions for biological products under section 351(a) 
of such Act (as amended by this Act) to the 
amount of the user fee applicable to such applica- 
tions under such section 351(a). 

(ii) Alteration of user fee. — If the audit per- 
formed under clause (i) indicates that the ratios com- 
pared under subclause (II) of such clause differ by 
more than 5 percent, then the Secretary shall alter the 
user fee applicable to applications submitted under 
such section 351(k) to more appropriately account for 
the costs of reviewing such applications. 

(iii) Accounting standards. — The Secretary shall 
perform an audit under clause (i) in conformance with 
the accounting principles, standards, and require- 
ments prescribed by the Comptroller General of the 
United States under section 3511 of title 31, United 
State Code, to ensure the validity of any potential var- 
iability. 

(4) Authorization of appropriations. — There is author- 
ized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection such sums 
as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2012. 
(g) Pediatric Studies of Biological Products. — 

(1) In general. — Section 351 of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 262) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing: 

"(m) Pediatric Studies. — 

June 9, 2010 



763 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 7002 



"(1) Application of certain provisions. — The provisions 
of subsections (a), (d), (e), (f), (i), (j), (k), (1), (p), and (q) of sec- 
tion 505A of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act shall 
apply with respect to the extension of a period under para- 
graphs (2) and (3) to the same extent and in the same manner 
as such provisions apply with respect to the extension of a pe- 
riod under subsection (b) or (c) of section 505A of the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. 

"(2) Market exclusivity for new biological prod- 
ucts. — If, prior to approval of an application that is submitted 
under subsection (a), the Secretary determines that informa- 
tion relating to the use of a new biological product in the pedi- 
atric population may produce health benefits in that popu- 
lation, the Secretary makes a written request for pediatric 
studies (which shall include a timeframe for completing such 
studies), the applicant agrees to the request, such studies are 
completed using appropriate formulations for each age group 
for which the study is requested within any such timeframe, 
and the reports thereof are submitted and accepted in accord- 
ance with section 505A(d)(3) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act — 

"(A) the periods for such biological product referred to 
in subsection (k)(7) are deemed to be 4 years and 6 months 
rather than 4 years and 12 years and 6 months rather 
than 12 years; and 

"(B) if the biological product is designated under sec- 
tion 526 for a rare disease or condition, the period for such 
biological product referred to in section 527(a) is deemed 
to be 7 years and 6 months rather than 7 years. 
"(3) Market exclusivity for already-marketed biologi- 
cal products. — If the Secretary determines that information 
relating to the use of a licensed biological product in the pedi- 
atric population may produce health benefits in that popu- 
lation and makes a written request to the holder of an ap- 
proved application under subsection (a) for pediatric studies 
(which shall include a timeframe for completing such studies), 
the holder agrees to the request, such studies are completed 
using appropriate formulations for each age group for which 
the study is requested within any such timeframe, and the re- 
ports thereof are submitted and accepted in accordance with 
section 505A(d)(3) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act— 

"(A) the periods for such biological product referred to 
in subsection (k)(7) are deemed to be 4 years and 6 months 
rather than 4 years and 12 years and 6 months rather 
than 12 years; and 

"(B) if the biological product is designated under sec- 
tion 526 for a rare disease or condition, the period for such 
biological product referred to in section 527(a) is deemed 
to be 7 years and 6 months rather than 7 years. 
"(4) Exception. — The Secretary shall not extend a period 
referred to in paragraph (2)(A), (2)(B), (3)(A), or (3)(B) if the 
determination under section 505A(d)(3) is made later than 9 
months prior to the expiration of such period.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 7003 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



764 



(2) Studies regarding pediatric research. — 

(A) Program for pediatric study of drugs. — Sub- 
section (a)(1) of section 4091 of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 284m) is amended by inserting ", biological 
products," after "including drugs". 

(B) Institute of medicine study. — Section 505A(p) of 
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 
355b(p)) is amended by striking paragraphs (4) and (5) and 
inserting the following: 

"(4) review and assess the number and importance of bio- 
logical products for children that are being tested as a result 
of the amendments made by the Biologies Price Competition 
and Innovation Act of 2009 and the importance for children, 
health care providers, parents, and others of labeling changes 
made as a result of such testing; 

"(5) review and assess the number, importance, and 
prioritization of any biological products that are not being test- 
ed for pediatric use; and 

"(6) offer recommendations for ensuring pediatric testing of 
biological products, including consideration of any incentives, 
such as those provided under this section or section 351(m) of 
the Public Health Service Act.". 

(h) Orphan Products. — If a reference product, as defined in 
section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262) (as 
amended by this Act) has been designated under section 526 of the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360bb) for a rare 
disease or condition, a biological product seeking approval for such 
disease or condition under subsection (k) of such section 351 as bio- 
similar to, or interchangeable with, such reference product may be 
licensed by the Secretary only after the expiration for such ref- 
erence product of the later of — 

(1) the 7-year period described in section 527(a) of the Fed- 
eral Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360cc(a)); and 

(2) the 12-year period described in subsection (k)(7) of such 
section 351. 

SEC. 7003. SAVINGS. 

(a) Determination. — The Secretary of the Treasury, in con- 
sultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall 
for each fiscal year determine the amount of savings to the Federal 
Government as a result of the enactment of this subtitle. 

(b) Use. — Notwithstanding any other provision of this subtitle 
(or an amendment made by this subtitle), the savings to the Fed- 
eral Government generated as a result of the enactment of this 
subtitle shall be used for deficit reduction. 

Subtitle B — More Affordable Medicines for 
Children and Underserved Communities 

SEC. 7101. EXPANDED PARTICIPATION IN 340B PROGRAM. 

(a) Expansion of Covered Entities Receiving Discounted 
Prices.— Section 340B(a)(4) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 256b(a)(4)) is amended by adding at the end the following: 

June 9, 2010 



765 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 7101 



"(M) A children's hospital excluded from the Medicare 
prospective payment system pursuant to section 
1886(d)(l)(B)(iii) of the Social Security Act, or a free-stand- 
ing cancer hospital excluded from the Medicare prospective 
payment system pursuant to section 1886(d)(l)(B)(v) of the 
Social Security Act, that would meet the requirements of 
subparagraph (L), including the disproportionate share ad- 
justment percentage requirement under clause (ii) of such 
subparagraph, if the hospital were a subsection (d) hos- 
pital as defined by section 1886(d)(1)(B) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act. 

"(N) An entity that is a critical access hospital (as de- 
termined under section 1820(c)(2) of the Social Security 
Act), and that meets the requirements of subparagraph 
(L)(i). 

"(0) An entity that is a rural referral center, as de- 
fined by section 1886(d)(5)(C)(i) of the Social Security Act, 
or a sole community hospital, as defined by section 
1886(d)(5)(C)(iii) of such Act, and that both meets the re- 
quirements of subparagraph (L)(i) and has a dispropor- 
tionate share adjustment percentage equal to or greater 
than 8 percent.". 
[See additional amendments to section 340B of PHSA made by 
section 2302 ofHCERA, p. 954~\ 

(b) Extension of Discount to Inpatient Drugs. — Section 
340B of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256b) is amend- 
ed— 

(1) in paragraphs (2), (5), (7), and (9) of subsection (a), by 
striking "outpatient" each place it appears \_But see amend- 
ments made by section 2302(1) ofHCERA on p. 954~\; and 

(2) in subsection (b) — 

(A) by striking "Other Definition" and all that fol- 
lows through "In this section" and inserting the following: 
"Other Definitions. — 

"(1) In general. — In this section"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 
"(2) Covered drug. — In this section, the term 'covered 

drug' — 

"(A) means a covered outpatient drug (as defined in 
section 1927(k)(2) of the Social Security Act); and 

"(B) includes, notwithstanding paragraph (3)(A) of sec- 
tion 1927(k) of such Act, a drug used in connection with 
an inpatient or outpatient service provided by a hospital 
described in subparagraph (L), (M), (N), or (O) of sub- 
section (a)(4) that is enrolled to participate in the drug dis- 
count program under this section.". 

(c) Prohibition on Group Purchasing Arrangements. — Sec- 
tion 340B(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256b(a)) 
is amended — [But see amendments made by section 2302(1) of 
HCERA on p. 9541 

[(1) in paragraph (4)(L) — ] 

[(A) in clause (i), by adding "and" at the end;] 

[(B) in clause (ii), by striking "; and" and inserting a 

period; and] 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 7101 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



766 



[(C) by striking clause (iii); and] 
[(2) in paragraph (5), as amended by subsection (b) — ] 

[(A) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) and (D) as 
subparagraphs (D) and (E); respectively; and] 

[(B) by inserting after subparagraph (B), the fol- 
lowing:] 

["(C) Prohibition on group purchasing arrange- 
ments. — ] 

["(i) In general. — A hospital described in sub- 
paragraph (L), (M), (N), or (O) of paragraph (4) shall 
not obtain covered outpatient drugs through a group 
purchasing organization or other group purchasing ar- 
rangement, except as permitted or provided for pursu- 
ant to clauses (ii) or (iii).] 

["(ii) Inpatient drugs. — Clause (i) shall not apply 
to drugs purchased for inpatient use.] 

["(iii) Exceptions. — The Secretary shall establish 
reasonable exceptions to clause (i) — ] 

["(I) with respect to a covered outpatient drug 
that is unavailable to be purchased through the 
program under this section due to a drug shortage 
problem, manufacturer noncompliance, or any 
other circumstance beyond the hospital's control;] 
["(II) to facilitate generic substitution when a 
generic covered outpatient drug is available at a 
lower price; or] 

["(III) to reduce in other ways the administra- 
tive burdens of managing both inventories of 
drugs subject to this section and inventories of 
drugs that are not subject to this section, so long 
as the exceptions do not create a duplicate dis- 
count problem in violation of subparagraph (A) or 
a diversion problem in violation of subparagraph 
(B)J 

["(iv) Purchasing arrangements for inpatient 
drugs. — The Secretary shall ensure that a hospital 
described in subparagraph (L), (M), (N), or (O) of sub- 
section (a)(4) that is enrolled to participate in the drug 
discount program under this section shall have mul- 
tiple options for purchasing covered drugs for inpa- 
tients, including by utilizing a group purchasing orga- 
nization or other group purchasing arrangement, es- 
tablishing and utilizing its own group purchasing pro- 
gram, purchasing directly from a manufacturer, and 
any other purchasing arrangements that the Secretary 
determines is appropriate to ensure access to drug dis- 
count pricing under this section for inpatient drugs 
taking into account the particular needs of small and 
rural hospitals.".] 
[(d) Medicaid Credits on Inpatient Drugs. — Section 340B of 
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256b) is amended by strik- 
ing subsection (c) and inserting the following: [Section 2502(f)(1)(B) 
of PPACA strikes subsection (c) of section 340B ofPHSA, as in effect 
on the date of PPACA, and redesignates subsection (d) of section 

June 9, 2010 



767 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 7102 



340B ofPHSA, as in effect on such date, as subsection (c). This sub- 
section strikes and replaces the redesignated version of subsection 
(c). Section 2302(a)(2) ofHCERA strikes the version of subsection (c) 
inserted by this subsection.]] 

["(c) Medicaid Credit. — Not later than 90 days after the date 
of filing of the hospital's most recently filed Medicare cost report, 
the hospital shall issue a credit as determined by the Secretary to 
the State Medicaid program for inpatient covered drugs provided to 
Medicaid recipients.".] 

(e) Effective Dates. — 

(1) In general. — The amendments made by this section 
and section 7102 shall take effect on January 1, 2010, and 
shall apply to drugs purchased on or after January 1, 2010. 

(2) Effectiveness. — The amendments made by this sec- 
tion and section 7102 shall be effective and shall be taken into 
account in determining whether a manufacturer is deemed to 
meet the requirements of section 340B(a) of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256b(a)), notwithstanding any other pro- 
vision of law. 

SEC. 7102. IMPROVEMENTS TO 340B PROGRAM INTEGRITY. 

(a) Integrity Improvements. — Subsection (d) of section 340B 
of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256b) is amended to 
read as follows: 

"(d) Improvements in Program Integrity. — 
"(1) Manufacturer compliance. — 

"(A) In general. — From amounts appropriated under 
paragraph (4), the Secretary shall provide for improve- 
ments in compliance by manufacturers with the require- 
ments of this section in order to prevent overcharges and 
other violations of the discounted pricing requirements 
specified in this section. 

"(B) Improvements. — The improvements described in 
subparagraph (A) shall include the following: 

"(i) The development of a system to enable the 
Secretary to verify the accuracy of ceiling prices cal- 
culated by manufacturers under subsection (a)(1) and 
charged to covered entities, which shall include the 
following: 

"(I) Developing and publishing through an ap- 
propriate policy or regulatory issuance, precisely 
defined standards and methodology for the cal- 
culation of ceiling prices under such subsection. 

"(II) Comparing regularly the ceiling prices 
calculated by the Secretary with the quarterly 
pricing data that is reported by manufacturers to 
the Secretary. 

"(Ill) Performing spot checks of sales trans- 
actions by covered entities. 

"(IV) Inquiring into the cause of any pricing 
discrepancies that may be identified and either 
taking, or requiring manufacturers to take, such 
corrective action as is appropriate in response to 
such price discrepancies. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 7102 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



768 



"(ii) The establishment of procedures for manufac- 
turers to issue refunds to covered entities in the event 
that there is an overcharge by the manufacturers, in- 
cluding the following: 

"(I) Providing the Secretary with an expla- 
nation of why and how the overcharge occurred, 
how the refunds will be calculated, and to whom 
the refunds will be issued. 

"(II) Oversight by the Secretary to ensure that 
the refunds are issued accurately and within a 
reasonable period of time, both in routine in- 
stances of retroactive adjustment to relevant pric- 
ing data and exceptional circumstances such as 
erroneous or intentional overcharging for covered 
drugs. 

"(hi) The provision of access through the Internet 
website of the Department of Health and Human 
Services to the applicable ceiling prices for covered 
drugs as calculated and verified by the Secretary in 
accordance with this section, in a manner (such as 
through the use of password protection) that limits 
such access to covered entities and adequately assures 
security and protection of privileged pricing data from 
unauthorized re-disclosure. 

"(iv) The development of a mechanism by which — 
"(I) rebates and other discounts provided by 
manufacturers to other purchasers subsequent to 
the sale of covered drugs to covered entities are 
reported to the Secretary; and 

"(II) appropriate credits and refunds are 
issued to covered entities if such discounts or re- 
bates have the effect of lowering the applicable 
ceiling price for the relevant quarter for the drugs 
involved. 

"(v) Selective auditing of manufacturers and 
wholesalers to ensure the integrity of the drug dis- 
count program under this section. 

"(vi) The imposition of sanctions in the form of 
civil monetary penalties, which — 

"(I) shall be assessed according to standards 
established in regulations to be promulgated by 
the Secretary not later than 180 days after the 
date of enactment of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act; 

"(II) shall not exceed $5,000 for each instance 
of overcharging a covered entity that may have oc- 
curred; and 

"(III) shall apply to any manufacturer with an 
agreement under this section that knowingly and 
intentionally charges a covered entity a price for 
purchase of a drug that exceeds the maximum ap- 
plicable price under subsection (a)(1). 
"(2) Covered entity compliance. — 

June 9, 2010 



769 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 7102 



"(A) In general. — From amounts appropriated under 
paragraph (4), the Secretary shall provide for improve- 
ments in compliance by covered entities with the require- 
ments of this section in order to prevent diversion and vio- 
lations of the duplicate discount provision and other re- 
quirements specified under subsection (a)(5). 

"(B) Improvements. — The improvements described in 
subparagraph (A) shall include the following: 

"(i) The development of procedures to enable and 
require covered entities to regularly update (at least 
annually) the information on the Internet website of 
the Department of Health and Human Services relat- 
ing to this section. 

"(ii) The development of a system for the Sec- 
retary to verify the accuracy of information regarding 
covered entities that is listed on the website described 
in clause (i). 

"(hi) The development of more detailed guidance 
describing methodologies and options available to cov- 
ered entities for billing covered drugs to State Med- 
icaid agencies in a manner that avoids duplicate dis- 
counts pursuant to subsection (a)(5)(A). 

"(iv) The establishment of a single, universal, and 
standardized identification system by which each cov- 
ered entity site can be identified by manufacturers, 
distributors, covered entities, and the Secretary for 
purposes of facilitating the ordering, purchasing, and 
delivery of covered drugs under this section, including 
the processing of chargebacks for such drugs. 

"(v) The imposition of sanctions, in appropriate 
cases as determined by the Secretary, additional to 
those to which covered entities are subject under sub- 
section (a)(5)(E), through one or more of the following 
actions: 

"(I) Where a covered entity knowingly and in- 
tentionally violates subsection (a)(5)(B), the cov- 
ered entity shall be required to pay a monetary 
penalty to a manufacturer or manufacturers in 
the form of interest on sums for which the covered 
entity is found liable under subsection (a)(5)(E), 
such interest to be compounded monthly and 
equal to the current short term interest rate as 
determined by the Federal Reserve for the time 
period for which the covered entity is liable. 

"(II) Where the Secretary determines a viola- 
tion of subsection (a)(5)(B) was systematic and 
egregious as well as knowing and intentional, re- 
moving the covered entity from the drug discount 
program under this section and disqualifying the 
entity from re-entry into such program for a rea- 
sonable period of time to be determined by the 
Secretary. 

"(Ill) Referring matters to appropriate Fed- 
eral authorities within the Food and Drug Admin- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 7102 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



770 



istration, the Office of Inspector General of De- 
partment of Health and Human Services, or other 
Federal agencies for consideration of appropriate 
action under other Federal statutes, such as the 
Prescription Drug Marketing Act (21 U.S.C. 353). 
"(3) Administrative dispute resolution process. — 

"(A) In general. — Not later than 180 days after the 
date of enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations to es- 
tablish and implement an administrative process for the 
resolution of claims by covered entities that they have 
been overcharged for drugs purchased under this section, 
and claims by manufacturers, after the conduct of audits 
as authorized by subsection (a)(5)(D), of violations of sub- 
sections (a)(5)(A) or (a)(5)(B), including appropriate proce- 
dures for the provision of remedies and enforcement of de- 
terminations made pursuant to such process through 
mechanisms and sanctions described in paragraphs (1)(B) 
and (2KB). 

"(B) Deadlines and procedures. — Regulations pro- 
mulgated by the Secretary under subparagraph (A) shall — 

"(i) designate or establish a decision-making offi- 
cial or decision-making body within the Department of 
Health and Human Services to be responsible for re- 
viewing and finally resolving claims by covered enti- 
ties that they have been charged prices for covered 
drugs in excess of the ceiling price described in sub- 
section (a)(1), and claims by manufacturers that viola- 
tions of subsection (a)(5)(A) or (a)(5)(B) have occurred; 

"(ii) establish such deadlines and procedures as 
may be necessary to ensure that claims shall be re- 
solved fairly, efficiently, and expeditiously; 

"(hi) establish procedures by which a covered enti- 
ty may discover and obtain such information and docu- 
ments from manufacturers and third parties as may 
be relevant to demonstrate the merits of a claim that 
charges for a manufacturer's product have exceeded 
the applicable ceiling price under this section, and 
may submit such documents and information to the 
administrative official or body responsible for adjudi- 
cating such claim; 

"(iv) require that a manufacturer conduct an audit 
of a covered entity pursuant to subsection (a)(5)(D) as 
a prerequisite to initiating administrative dispute res- 
olution proceedings against a covered entity; 

"(v) permit the official or body designated under 
clause (i), at the request of a manufacturer or manu- 
facturers, to consolidate claims brought by more than 
one manufacturer against the same covered entity 
where, in the judgment of such official or body, con- 
solidation is appropriate and consistent with the goals 
of fairness and economy of resources; and 

"(vi) include provisions and procedures to permit 
multiple covered entities to jointly assert claims of 

June 9, 2010 



771 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 7103 



overcharges by the same manufacturer for the same 
drug or drugs in one administrative proceeding, and 
permit such claims to be asserted on behalf of covered 
entities by associations or organizations representing 
the interests of such covered entities and of which the 
covered entities are members. 

"(C) Finality of administrative resolution. — The 
administrative resolution of a claim or claims under the 
regulations promulgated under subparagraph (A) shall be 
a final agency decision and shall be binding upon the par- 
ties involved, unless invalidated by an order of a court of 
competent jurisdiction. 

"(4) Authorization of appropriations. — There are au- 
thorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, such 
sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2010 and each suc- 
ceeding fiscal year.". 

(b) Conforming Amendments. — Section 340B(a) of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256b(a)) is amended— 

(1) in subsection (a)(1), by adding at the end the following: 
"Each such agreement shall require that the manufacturer fur- 
nish the Secretary with reports, on a quarterly basis, of the 
price for each covered drug subject to the agreement that, ac- 
cording to the manufacturer, represents the maximum price 
that covered entities may permissibly be required to pay for 
the drug (referred to in this section as the 'ceiling price'), and 
shall require that the manufacturer offer each covered entity 
covered drugs for purchase at or below the applicable ceiling 
price if such drug is made available to any other purchaser at 
any price."; and 

(2) in the first sentence of subsection (a)(5)(E), as redesig- 
nated by section 7101(c), by inserting "after audit as described 
in subparagraph (D) and" after "finds,". 

SEC. 7103. GAO STUDY TO MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON IMPROVING 
THE 340B PROGRAM. 

(a) Report. — Not later than 18 months after the date of enact- 
ment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall submit to Congress a report that examines whether those in- 
dividuals served by the covered entities under the program under 
section 340B of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256b) (re- 
ferred to in this section as the "340B program") are receiving opti- 
mal health care services. 

(b) Recommendations. — The report under subsection (a) shall 
include recommendations on the following: 

(1) Whether the 340B program should be expanded since 
it is anticipated that the 47,000,000 individuals who are unin- 
sured as of the date of enactment of this Act will have health 
care coverage once this Act is implemented. 

(2) Whether mandatory sales of certain products by the 
340B program could hinder patients access to those therapies 
through any provider. 

(3) Whether income from the 340B program is being used 
by the covered entities under the program to further the pro- 
gram objectives. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 8001 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



772 



TITLE VIII— CLASS ACT 

SEC. 8001. SHORT TITLE OF TITLE. 

This title may be cited as the "Community Living Assistance 
Services and Supports Act" or the "CLASS Act". 

SEC. 8002. ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL VOLUNTARY INSURANCE 
PROGRAM FOR PURCHASING COMMUNITY LP7ING ASSIST- 
ANCE SERVICES AND SUPPORT. 

(a) Establishment of CLASS Program. — 

(1) In general.— The Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
201 et seq.), as amended by section 4302(a), is amended by 
adding at the end the following: 

"TITLE XXXII— COMMUNITY LIVING 
ASSISTANCE SERVICES AND SUPPORTS 

"SEC. 3201 [42 U.S.C. 30011]. PURPOSE. 

"The purpose of this title is to establish a national voluntary 
insurance program for purchasing community living assistance 
services and supports in order to — 

"(1) provide individuals with functional limitations with 
tools that will allow them to maintain their personal and fi- 
nancial independence and live in the community through a 
new financing strategy for community living assistance serv- 
ices and supports; 

"(2) establish an infrastructure that will help address the 
Nation's community living assistance services and supports 
needs; 

"(3) alleviate burdens on family caregivers; and 

"(4) address institutional bias by providing a financing 

mechanism that supports personal choice and independence to 

live in the community. 

"SEC. 3202 [42 U.S.C. 30011-1]. DEFINITIONS. 

"In this title: 

"(1) Active enrollee. — The term 'active enrollee' means 
an individual who is enrolled in the CLASS program in accord- 
ance with section 3204 and who has paid any premiums due 
to maintain such enrollment. 

"(2) Actively employed. — The term 'actively employed' 
means an individual who — 

"(A) is reporting for work at the individual's usual 
place of employment or at another location to which the in- 
dividual is required to travel because of the individual's 
employment (or in the case of an individual who is a mem- 
ber of the uniformed services, is on active duty and is 
physically able to perform the duties of the individual's po- 
sition); and 

"(B) is able to perform all the usual and customary du- 
ties of the individual's employment on the individual's reg- 
ular work schedule. 

June 9, 2010 



773 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 8002X3202 PHSA 



"(3) Activities of daily living. — The term 'activities of 
daily Irving' means each of the following activities specified in 
section 7702B(c)(2)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986: 
"(A) Eating. 
"(B) Toileting. 
"(C) Transferring. 
"(D) Bathing. 
"(E) Dressing. 
"(F) Continence. 
"(4) CLASS program— The term 'CLASS program' means 
the program established under this title. 

"(5) Eligibility assessment system. — The term 'Eligi- 
bility Assessment System' means the entity established by the 
Secretary under section 3205(a)(2) to make functional eligi- 
bility determinations for the CLASS program. 
"(6) Eligible beneficiary. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'eligible beneficiary' 
means any individual who is an active enrollee in the 
CLASS program and, as of the date described in subpara- 
graph (B)— 

"(i) has paid premiums for enrollment in such pro- 
gram for at least 60 months; 

"(ii) has earned, with respect to at least 3 calendar 
years that occur during the first 60 months for which 
the individual has paid premiums for enrollment in 
the program, at least an amount equal to the amount 
of wages and self-employment income which an indi- 
vidual must have in order to be credited with a quar- 
ter of coverage under section 213(d) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act for the year; and 

"(hi) has paid premiums for enrollment in such 
program for at least 24 consecutive months, if a lapse 
in premium payments of more than 3 months has oc- 
curred during the period that begins on the date of the 
individual's enrollment and ends on the date of such 
determination. 

"(B) Date described. — For purposes of subparagraph 
(A), the date described in this subparagraph is the date on 
which the individual is determined to have a functional 
limitation described in section 3203(a)(1)(C) that is ex- 
pected to last for a continuous period of more than 90 
days. 

"(C) Regulations. — The Secretary shall promulgate 
regulations specifying exceptions to the minimum earnings 
requirements under subparagraph (A)(ii) for purposes of 
being considered an eligible beneficiary for certain popu- 
lations. 

"(7) Hospital; nursing facility; intermediate care fa- 
cility FOR THE MENTALLY RETARDED; INSTITUTION FOR MENTAL 
DISEASES. — The terms 'hospital', 'nursing facility', 'intermediate 
care facility for the mentally retarded', and 'institution for 
mental diseases' have the meanings given such terms for pur- 
poses of Medicaid. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 8002X3203 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



774 



"(8) CLASS independence advisory council. — The term 
'CLASS Independence Advisory Council' or 'Council' means the 
Advisory Council established under section 3207 to advise the 
Secretary. 

"(9) CLASS independence benefit plan. — The term 
'CLASS Independence Benefit Plan' means the benefit plan de- 
veloped and designated by the Secretary in accordance with 
section 3203. 

"(10) CLASS independence fund.— The term 'CLASS 
Independence Fund' or 'Fund' means the fund established 
under section 3206. 

"(11) Medicaid. — The term 'Medicaid' means the program 
established under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396 et seq.). 

"(12) Poverty line. — The term 'poverty line' has the 
meaning given that term in section 2110(c)(5) of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 1397jj(c)(5)). 

"(13) Protection and advocacy system. — The term 'Pro- 
tection and Advocacy System' means the system for each State 
established under section 143 of the Developmental Disabilities 
Assistance and Bill of Rights Act of 2000 (42 U.S.C. 15043). 

"SEC. 3203 [42 U.S.C. 30011-2]. CLASS INDEPENDENCE BENEFIT PLAN. 

"(a) Process for Development. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary, in consultation with ap- 
propriate actuaries and other experts, shall develop at least 3 
actuarially sound benefit plans as alternatives for consider- 
ation for designation by the Secretary as the CLASS Independ- 
ence Benefit Plan under which eligible beneficiaries shall re- 
ceive benefits under this title. Each of the plan alternatives de- 
veloped shall be designed to provide eligible beneficiaries with 
the benefits described in section 3205 consistent with the fol- 
lowing requirements: 

"(A) Premiums. — 

"(i) In general. — Beginning with the first year of 
the CLASS program, and for each year thereafter, sub- 
ject to clauses (ii) and (iii), the Secretary shall estab- 
lish all premiums to be paid by enrollees for the year 
based on an actuarial analysis of the 75-year costs of 
the program that ensures solvency throughout such 
75-year period. 

"(ii) Nominal premium for poorest individuals 

AND FULL-TIME STUDENTS. — 

"(I) In general. — The monthly premium for 
enrollment in the CLASS program shall not ex- 
ceed the applicable dollar amount per month de- 
termined under subclause (II) for — 

"(aa) any individual whose income does 
not exceed the poverty line; and 

"(bb) any individual who has not attained 
age 22, and is actively employed during any 
period in which the individual is a full-time 
student (as determined by the Secretary). 

June 9, 2010 



775 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 8002X3203 PHSA 



"(II) Applicable dollar amount. — The appli- 
cable dollar amount described in this subclause is 
the amount equal to $5, increased by the percent- 
age increase in the consumer price index for all 
urban consumers (U.S. city average) for each year 
occurring after 2009 and before such year, 
"(hi) Class independence fund reserves. — At 
such time as the CLASS program has been in oper- 
ation for 10 years, the Secretary shall establish all 
premiums to be paid by enrollees for the year based on 
an actuarial analysis that accumulated reserves in the 
CLASS Independence Fund would not decrease in that 
year. At such time as the Secretary determines the 
CLASS program demonstrates a sustained ability to fi- 
nance expected yearly expenses with expected yearly 
premiums and interest credited to the CLASS Inde- 
pendence Fund, the Secretary may decrease the re- 
quired amount of CLASS Independence Fund reserves. 
"(B) Vesting period. — A 5-year vesting period for eli- 
gibility for benefits. 

"(C) Benefit triggers. — A benefit trigger for provi- 
sion of benefits that requires a determination that an indi- 
vidual has a functional limitation, as certified by a li- 
censed health care practitioner, described in any of the fol- 
lowing clauses that is expected to last for a continuous pe- 
riod of more than 90 days: 

"(i) The individual is determined to be unable to 
perform at least the minimum number (which may be 
2 or 3) of activities of daily living as are required 
under the plan for the provision of benefits without 
substantial assistance (as defined by the Secretary) 
from another individual. 

"(ii) The individual requires substantial super- 
vision to protect the individual from threats to health 
and safety due to substantial cognitive impairment. 

"(hi) The individual has a level of functional limi- 
tation similar (as determined under regulations pre- 
scribed by the Secretary) to the level of functional lim- 
itation described in clause (i) or (ii). 
"(D) Cash benefit. — Payment of a cash benefit that 
satisfies the following requirements: 

"(i) Minimum required amount. — The benefit 
amount provides an eligible beneficiary with not less 
than an average of $50 per day (as determined based 
on the reasonably expected distribution of bene- 
ficiaries receiving benefits at various benefit levels). 

"(ii) Amount scaled to functional ability. — 
The benefit amount is varied based on a scale of func- 
tional ability, with not less than 2, and not more than 
6, benefit level amounts. 

"(hi) Daily or weekly. — The benefit is paid on a 
daily or weekly basis. 

"(iv) No lifetime or aggregate limit. — The ben- 
efit is not subject to any lifetime or aggregate limit. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 8002X3203 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



776 



[.Subparagraph (E) stricken by section 10801(a)(l)(A)~\ 

"(2) Review and recommendation by the class inde- 
pendence advisory council. — The CLASS Independence Ad- 
visory Council shall — 

"(A) evaluate the alternative benefit plans developed 
under paragraph (1); and 

"(B) recommend for designation as the CLASS Inde- 
pendence Benefit Plan for offering to the public the plan 
that the Council determines best balances price and bene- 
fits to meet enrollees' needs in an actuarially sound man- 
ner, while optimizing the probability of the long-term sus- 
tainability of the CLASS program. 

"(3) Designation by the secretary. — Not later than Oc- 
tober 1, 2012, the Secretary, taking into consideration the rec- 
ommendation of the CLASS Independence Advisory Council 
under paragraph (2)(B), shall designate a benefit plan as the 
CLASS Independence Benefit Plan. The Secretary shall pub- 
lish such designation, along with details of the plan and the 
reasons for the selection by the Secretary, in a final rule that 
allows for a period of public comment. 
"(b) Additional Premium Requirements. — 
"(1) Adjustment of premiums. — 

"(A) In general. — Except as provided in subpara- 
graphs (B), (C), (D), and (E), the amount of the monthly 
premium determined for an individual upon such individ- 
ual's enrollment in the CLASS program shall remain the 
same for as long as the individual is an active enrollee in 
the program. 

"(B) Recalculated premium if required for pro- 
gram SOLVENCY. — 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), if the Sec- 
retary determines, based on the most recent report of 
the Board of Trustees of the CLASS Independence 
Fund, the advice of the CLASS Independence Advisory 
Council, and the annual report of the Inspector Gen- 
eral of the Department of Health and Human Serv- 
ices, and waste, fraud, and abuse, or such other infor- 
mation as the Secretary determines appropriate, that 
the monthly premiums and income to the CLASS 
Independence Fund for a year are projected to be in- 
sufficient with respect to the 20-year period that be- 
gins with that year, the Secretary shall adjust the 
monthly premiums for individuals enrolled in the 
CLASS program as necessary (but maintaining a 
nominal premium for enrollees whose income is below 
the poverty line or who are full-time students actively 
employed). 

"(ii) Exemption from increase. — Any increase in 
a monthly premium imposed as result of a determina- 
tion described in clause (i) shall not apply with respect 
to the monthly premium of any active enrollee who — 
"(I) has attained age 65; 

"(II) has paid premiums for enrollment in the 
program for at least 20 years; and 

June 9, 2010 



777 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 8002X3203 PHSA 



"(III) is not actively employed. 
"(C) Recalculated premium if reenrollment after 

MORE THAN A 3-MONTH LAPSE. — 

"(i) In general. — The reenrollment of an indi- 
vidual after a 90-day period during which the indi- 
vidual failed to pay the monthly premium required to 
maintain the individual's enrollment in the CLASS 
program shall be treated as an initial enrollment for 
purposes of age-adjusting the premium for reenroll- 
ment in the program. [As revised by section 
10801(a)(1)(B)] 

"(ii) Credit for prior months if reenrolled 
WITHIN 5 YEARS. — An individual who reenrolls in the 
CLASS program after such a 90-day period and before 
the end of the 5-year period that begins with the first 
month for which the individual failed to pay the 
monthly premium required to maintain the individ- 
ual's enrollment in the program shall be — 

"(I) credited with any months of paid pre- 
miums that accrued prior to the individual's lapse 
in enrollment; and 

"(II) notwithstanding the total amount of any 
such credited months, required to satisfy section 
3202(6)(A)(ii) before being eligible to receive bene- 
fits. 

"(D) NO LONGER STATUS AS A FULL-TIME STUDENT. — An 
individual subject to a nominal premium on the basis of 
being described in subsection (a)(l)(A)(ii)(I)(bb) who ceases 
to be described in that subsection, beginning with the first 
month following the month in which the individual ceases 
to be so described, shall be subject to the same monthly 
premium as the monthly premium that applies to an indi- 
vidual of the same age who first enrolls in the program 
under the most similar circumstances as the individual 
(such as the first year of eligibility for enrollment in the 
program or in a subsequent year). 

"(E) Penalty for reenollment after 5-year 
lapse. — In the case of an individual who reenrolls in the 
CLASS program after the end of the 5-year period de- 
scribed in subparagraph (C)(ii), the monthly premium re- 
quired for the individual shall be the age-adjusted pre- 
mium that would be applicable to an initially enrolling in- 
dividual who is the same age as the reenrolling individual, 
increased by the greater of — 

"(i) an amount that the Secretary determines is 
actuarially sound for each month that occurs during 
the period that begins with the first month for which 
the individual failed to pay the monthly premium re- 
quired to maintain the individual's enrollment in the 
CLASS program and ends with the month preceding 
the month in which the reenollment is effective; or 

"(ii) 1 percent of the applicable age-adjusted pre- 
mium for each such month occurring in such period. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 8002\3204 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



778 



"(2) Administrative expenses. — In determining the 
monthly premiums for the CLASS program the Secretary may 
factor in costs for administering the program, not to exceed for 
any year in which the program is in effect under this title, an 
amount equal to 3 percent of all premiums paid during the 
year. 

"(3) No underwriting requirements. — No underwriting 
(other than on the basis of age in accordance with subpara- 
graphs (D) and (E) of paragraph (1)) shall be used to — 

"(A) determine the monthly premium for enrollment in 
the CLASS program; or 

"(B) prevent an individual from enrolling in the pro- 
gram. 

"(c) Self-attestation and Verification of Income. — The 
Secretary shall establish procedures to — 

"(1) permit an individual who is eligible for the nominal 
premium required under subsection (a)(l)(A)(ii) to self-attest 
that their income does not exceed the poverty line or that their 
status as a full-time student who is actively employed; [As re- 
vised by section 10801(a)(1)(C)] 

"(2) verify, using procedures similar to the procedures used 
by the Commissioner of Social Security under section 
1631(e)(l)(B)(ii) of the Social Security Act and consistent with 
the requirements applicable to the conveyance of data and in- 
formation under section 1942 of such Act, the validity of such 
self-attestation; and 

"(3) require an individual to confirm, on at least an annual 
basis, that their income does not exceed the poverty line or 
that they continue to maintain such status. 

"SEC. 3204 [42 U.S.C. 30011-3]. ENROLLMENT AND DISENROLLMENT RE- 
QUIREMENTS. 

"(a) Automatic Enrollment. — 

"(1) In general. — Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary, 
in coordination with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall estab- 
lish procedures under which each individual described in sub- 
section (c) may be automatically enrolled in the CLASS pro- 
gram by an employer of such individual in the same manner 
as an employer may elect to automatically enroll employees in 
a plan under section 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986. 

"(2) Alternative enrollment procedures. — The proce- 
dures established under paragraph (1) shall provide for an al- 
ternative enrollment process for an individual described in sub- 
section (c) in the case of such an individual — 
"(A) who is self-employed; 
"(B) who has more than 1 employer; or 
"(C) whose employer does not elect to participate in 
the automatic enrollment process established by the Sec- 
retary. 

"(3) Administration. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary and the Secretary of 
the Treasury shall, by regulation, establish procedures to 
ensure that an individual is not automatically enrolled in 
the CLASS program by more than 1 employer. 

June 9, 2010 



779 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 8002X3204 PHSA 



"(B) Form. — Enrollment in the CLASS program shall 
be made in such manner as the Secretary may prescribe 
in order to ensure ease of administration. 
"(b) Election to Opt-Out. — An individual described in sub- 
section (c) may elect to waive enrollment in the CLASS program at 
any time in such form and manner as the Secretary and the Sec- 
retary of the Treasury shall prescribe. 

"(c) Individual Described. — For purposes of enrolling in the 
CLASS program, an individual described in this paragraph is an 
individual — 

"(1) who has attained age 18; 
"(2) who— 

"(A) receives wages or income on which there is im- 
posed a tax under section 3101(a) or 3201(a) of the Inter- 
nal Revenue Code of 1986; or [Replaced by section 
10802(a)(2)(A)] 

"(B) derives self-employment income on which there is 
imposed a tax under section 1401(a) of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986; 
"(3) who is actively employed; and 
"(4) who is not — 

"(A) a patient in a hospital or nursing facility, an in- 
termediate care facility for the mentally retarded, or an in- 
stitution for mental diseases and receiving medical assist- 
ance under Medicaid; or 

"(B) confined in a jail, prison, other penal institution 
or correctional facility, or by court order pursuant to con- 
viction of a criminal offense or in connection with a verdict 
or finding described in section 202(x)(l)(A)(ii) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 402(x)(l)(A)(ii)). 
"(d) Rule of Construction. — Nothing in this title shall be 
construed as requiring an active enrollee to continue to satisfy sub- 
paragraph (A) or (B) of subsection (c)(2) in order to maintain enroll- 
ment in the CLASS program. [As revised by section 10801(a)(2)(B)~\ 
"(e) Payment. — 

"(1) Payroll deduction. — An amount equal to the month- 
ly premium for the enrollment in the CLASS program of an in- 
dividual shall be deducted from the wages or self-employment 
income of such individual in accordance with such procedures 
as the Secretary, in coordination with the Secretary of the 
Treasury, shall establish for employers who elect to deduct and 
withhold such premiums on behalf of enrolled employees. 

"(2) Alternative payment mechanism. — The Secretary, in 
coordination with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall establish 
alternative procedures for the payment of monthly premiums 
by an individual enrolled in the CLASS program — 

"(A) who does not have an employer who elects to de- 
duct and withhold premiums in accordance with paragraph 
(1); or [As revised by section 10801(a)(2)(C)] 

"(B) who does not earn wages or derive self-employ- 
ment income. 
"(f) Transfer of Premiums Collected. — 

"(1) In general. — During each calendar year the Secretary 
of the Treasury shall deposit into the CLASS Independence 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 8002N3205 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



780 



Fund a total amount equal, in the aggregate, to 100 percent of 
the premiums collected during that year. 

"(2) Transfers based on estimates. — The amount depos- 
ited pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be transferred in at least 
monthly payments to the CLASS Independence Fund on the 
basis of estimates by the Secretary and certified to the Sec- 
retary of the Treasury of the amounts collected in accordance 
with subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (5). Proper ad- 
justments shall be made in amounts subsequently transferred 
to the Fund to the extent prior estimates were in excess of, or 
were less than, actual amounts collected. 
"(g) Other Enrollment and Disenrollment Opportuni- 
ties. — The Secretary, in coordination with the Secretary of the 
Treasury, shall establish procedures under which — 

"(1) an individual who, in the year of the individual's ini- 
tial eligibility to enroll in the CLASS program, has not enrolled 
in the program, is eligible to elect to enroll in the program, in 
such form and manner as the Secretaries shall establish, only 
during an open enrollment period established by the Secre- 
taries that is specific to the individual and that may not occur 
more frequently than biennially after the date on which the in- 
dividual first elected to waive enrollment in the program; and 
[As revised by section 10801(a)(2)(D)] 

"(2) an individual shall only be permitted to disenroll from 
the program (other than for nonpayment of premiums) during 
an annual disenrollment period established by the Secretaries 
and in such form and manner as the Secretaries shall estab- 
lish. 

"SEC. 3205 [42 U.S.C. 30011-4]. BENEFITS. 

"(a) Determination of Eligibility. — 

"(1) Application for receipt of benefits. — The Sec- 
retary shall establish procedures under which an active en- 
rollee shall apply for receipt of benefits under the CLASS Inde- 
pendence Benefit Plan. 

"(2) Eligibility assessments. — 

"(A) In general. — Not later than January 1, 2012, the 
Secretary shall — 

"(i) establish an Eligibility Assessment System 
(other than a service with which the Commissioner of 
Social Security has entered into an agreement, with 
respect to any State, to make disability determinations 
for purposes of title II or XVI of the Social Security 
Act) to provide for eligibility assessments of active en- 
rollees who apply for receipt of benefits; 

"(ii) enter into an agreement with the Protection 
and Advocacy System for each State to provide advo- 
cacy services in accordance with subsection (d); and 

"(hi) enter into an agreement with public and pri- 
vate entities to provide advice and assistance coun- 
seling in accordance with subsection (e). 
"(B) Regulations. — The Secretary shall promulgate 
regulations to develop an expedited nationally equitable 
eligibility determination process, as certified by a licensed 

June 9, 2010 



781 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 8002X3205 PHSA 



health care practitioner, an appeals process, and a redeter- 
mination process, as certified by a licensed health care 
practitioner, including whether an active enrollee is eligi- 
ble for a cash benefit under the program and if so, the 
amount of the cash benefit (in accordance the sliding scale 
established under the plan). 

"(C) Presumptive eligibility for certain institu- 
tionalized ENROLLEES PLANNING TO DISCHARGE. — An ac- 
tive enrollee shall be deemed presumptively eligible if the 
enrollee — 

"(i) has applied for, and attests is eligible for, the 
maximum cash benefit available under the sliding 
scale established under the CLASS Independence Ben- 
efit Plan; 

"(ii) is a patient in a hospital (but only if the hos- 
pitalization is for long-term care), nursing facility, in- 
termediate care facility for the mentally retarded, or 
an institution for mental diseases; and 

"(hi) is in the process of, or about to begin the 
process of, planning to discharge from the hospital, fa- 
cility, or institution, or within 60 days from the date 
of discharge from the hospital, facility, or institution. 
"(D) Appeals. — The Secretary shall establish proce- 
dures under which an applicant for benefits under the 
CLASS Independence Benefit Plan shall be guaranteed the 
right to appeal an adverse determination. 
"(b) Benefits. — An eligible beneficiary shall receive the fol- 
lowing benefits under the CLASS Independence Benefit Plan: 

"(1) Cash benefit. — A cash benefit established by the Sec- 
retary in accordance with the requirements of section 
3203(a)(1)(D) that— 

"(A) the first year in which beneficiaries receive the 
benefits under the plan, is not less than the average dollar 
amount specified in clause (i) of such section; and 

"(B) for any subsequent year, is not less than the aver- 
age per day dollar limit applicable under this subpara- 
graph for the preceding year, increased by the percentage 
increase in the consumer price index for all urban con- 
sumers (U.S. city average) over the previous year. 
"(2) Advocacy services. — Advocacy services in accordance 
with subsection (d). 

"(3) Advice and assistance counseling. — Advice and as- 
sistance counseling in accordance with subsection (e). 

"(4) Administrative expenses. — Advocacy services and 
advise and assistance counseling services under paragraphs (2) 
and (3) of this subsection shall be included as administrative 
expenses under section 3203(b)(3). 
"(c) Payment of Benefits. — 

"(1) Life independence account. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall establish proce- 
dures for administering the provision of benefits to eligible 
beneficiaries under the CLASS Independence Benefit Plan, 
including the payment of the cash benefit for the bene- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 8002N3205 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



782 



ficiary into a Life Independence Account established by the 
Secretary on behalf of each eligible beneficiary. 

"(B) Use of cash benefits. — Cash benefits paid into 
a Life Independence Account of an eligible beneficiary 
shall be used to purchase nonmedical services and sup- 
ports that the beneficiary needs to maintain his or her 
independence at home or in another residential setting of 
their choice in the community, including (but not limited 
to) home modifications, assistive technology, accessible 
transportation, homemaker services, respite care, personal 
assistance services, home care aides, and nursing support. 
Nothing in the preceding sentence shall prevent an eligible 
beneficiary from using cash benefits paid into a Life Inde- 
pendence Account for obtaining assistance with decision 
making concerning medical care, including the right to ac- 
cept or refuse medical or surgical treatment and the right 
to formulate advance directives or other written instruc- 
tions recognized under State law, such as a living will or 
durable power of attorney for health care, in the case that 
an injury or illness causes the individual to be unable to 
make health care decisions. 

"(C) Electronic management of funds. — The Sec- 
retary shall establish procedures for — 

"(i) crediting an account established on behalf of a 
beneficiary with the beneficiary's cash daily benefit; 

"(ii) allowing the beneficiary to access such ac- 
count through debit cards; and 

"(hi) accounting for withdrawals by the beneficiary 
from such account. 

"(D) Primary payor rules for beneficiaries who 
are enrolled in medicaid. — In the case of an eligible 
beneficiary who is enrolled in Medicaid, the following pay- 
ment rules shall apply: 

"(i) Institutionalized beneficiary. — If the bene- 
ficiary is a patient in a hospital, nursing facility, inter- 
mediate care facility for the mentally retarded, or an 
institution for mental diseases, the beneficiary shall 
retain an amount equal to 5 percent of the bene- 
ficiary's daily or weekly cash benefit (as applicable) 
(which shall be in addition to the amount of the bene- 
ficiary's personal needs allowance provided under 
Medicaid), and the remainder of such benefit shall be 
applied toward the facility's cost of providing the bene- 
ficiary's care, and Medicaid shall provide secondary 
coverage for such care. 

"(ii) Beneficiaries receiving home and commu- 
nity-based services. — 

"(I) 50 PERCENT of benefit retained by ben- 
eficiary. — Subject to subclause (II), if a bene- 
ficiary is receiving medical assistance under Med- 
icaid for home and community based services, the 
beneficiary shall retain an amount equal to 50 
percent of the beneficiary's daily or weekly cash 
benefit (as applicable), and the remainder of the 

June 9, 2010 



783 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 8002X3205 PHSA 



daily or weekly cash benefit shall be applied to- 
ward the cost to the State of providing such as- 
sistance (and shall not be used to claim Federal 
matching funds under Medicaid), and Medicaid 
shall provide secondary coverage for the remain- 
der of any costs incurred in providing such assist- 
ance. 

"(II) Requirement for state offset. — A 
State shall be paid the remainder of a bene- 
ficiary's daily or weekly cash benefit under sub- 
clause (I) only if the State home and community- 
based waiver under section 1115 of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 1315) or subsection (c) or (d) 
of section 1915 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n), or 
the State plan amendment under subsection (i) of 
such section does not include a waiver of the re- 
quirements of section 1902(a)(1) of the Social Se- 
curity Act (relating to statewideness) or of section 
1902(a)(10)(B) of such Act (relating to com- 
parability) and the State offers at a minimum case 
management services, personal care services, ha- 
bilitation services, and respite care under such a 
waiver or State plan amendment. 

"(Ill) Definition of home and community- 
based services. — In this clause, the term 'home 
and community-based services' means any serv- 
ices which may be offered under a home and com- 
munity-based waiver authorized for a State under 
section 1115 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1315) or subsection (c) or (d) of section 1915 of 
such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n) or under a State plan 
amendment under subsection (i) of such section, 
"(hi) Beneficiaries enrolled in programs of 

ALL-INCLUSIVE CARE FOR THE ELDERLY (PACE). — 

"(I) In general. — Subject to subclause (II), if 
a beneficiary is receiving medical assistance under 
Medicaid for PACE program services under sec- 
tion 1934 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396u-4), the beneficiary shall retain an amount 
equal to 50 percent of the beneficiary's daily or 
weekly cash benefit (as applicable), and the re- 
mainder of the daily or weekly cash benefit shall 
be applied toward the cost to the State of pro- 
viding such assistance (and shall not be used to 
claim Federal matching funds under Medicaid), 
and Medicaid shall provide secondary coverage for 
the remainder of any costs incurred in providing 
such assistance. 

"(II) Institutionalized recipients of pace 
program services. — If a beneficiary receiving as- 
sistance under Medicaid for PACE program serv- 
ices is a patient in a hospital, nursing facility, in- 
termediate care facility for the mentally retarded, 
or an institution for mental diseases, the bene- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 8002N3205 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



784 



ficiary shall be treated as in institutionalized ben- 
eficiary under clause (i). 
"(2) Authorized representatives. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall establish proce- 
dures to allow access to a beneficiary's cash benefits by an 
authorized representative of the eligible beneficiary on 
whose behalf such benefits are paid. 

"(B) Quality assurance and protection against 
fraud and abuse. — The procedures established under sub- 
paragraph (A) shall ensure that authorized representatives 
of eligible beneficiaries comply with standards of conduct 
established by the Secretary, including standards requir- 
ing that such representatives provide quality services on 
behalf of such beneficiaries, do not have conflicts of inter- 
est, and do not misuse benefits paid on behalf of such 
beneficiaries or otherwise engage in fraud or abuse. 
"(3) Commencement of benefits. — Benefits shall be paid 
to, or on behalf of, an eligible beneficiary beginning with the 
first month in which an application for such benefits is ap- 
proved. 

"(4) Rollover option for lump-sum payment. — An eligi- 
ble beneficiary may elect to — 

"(A) defer payment of their daily or weekly benefit and 
to rollover any such deferred benefits from month-to- 
month, but not from year-to-year; and 

"(B) receive a lump-sum payment of such deferred ben- 
efits in an amount that may not exceed the lesser of — 

"(i) the total amount of the accrued deferred bene- 
fits; or 

"(ii) the applicable annual benefit. 
"(5) Period for determination of annual benefits. — 

"(A) In general. — The applicable period for deter- 
mining with respect to an eligible beneficiary the applica- 
ble annual benefit and the amount of any accrued deferred 
benefits is the 12-month period that commences with the 
first month in which the beneficiary began to receive such 
benefits, and each 12-month period thereafter. 

"(B) Inclusion of increased benefits. — The Sec- 
retary shall establish procedures under which cash bene- 
fits paid to an eligible beneficiary that increase or decrease 
as a result of a change in the functional status of the bene- 
ficiary before the end of a 12-month benefit period shall be 
included in the determination of the applicable annual 
benefit paid to the eligible beneficiary. 

"(C) Recoupment of unpaid, accrued benefits. — 

"(i) In general. — The Secretary, in coordination 
with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall recoup any 
accrued benefits in the event of — 

"(I) the death of a beneficiary; or 
"(II) the failure of a beneficiary to elect under 
paragraph (4)(B) to receive such benefits as a 
lump-sum payment before the end of the 12- 
month period in which such benefits accrued. 

June 9, 2010 



785 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 8002X3205 PHSA 



"(ii) Payment into class independence fund. — 
Any benefits recouped in accordance with clause (i) 
shall be paid into the CLASS Independence Fund and 
used in accordance with section 3206. 
"(6) Requirement to recertify eligibility for receipt 
of benefits. — An eligible beneficiary shall periodically, as de- 
termined by the Secretary — 

"(A) recertify by submission of medical evidence the 
beneficiary's continued eligibility for receipt of benefits; 
and 

"(B) submit records of expenditures attributable to the 
aggregate cash benefit received by the beneficiary during 
the preceding year. 

"(7) Supplement, not supplant other health care ben- 
efits. — Subject to the Medicaid payment rules under para- 
graph (1)(D), benefits received by an eligible beneficiary shall 
supplement, but not supplant, other health care benefits for 
which the beneficiary is eligible under Medicaid or any other 
Federally funded program that provides health care benefits or 
assistance. 

"(d) Advocacy Services. — An agreement entered into under 
subsection (a)(2)(A)(ii) shall require the Protection and Advocacy 
System for the State to — 

"(1) assign, as needed, an advocacy counselor to each eligi- 
ble beneficiary that is covered by such agreement and who 
shall provide an eligible beneficiary with — 

"(A) information regarding how to access the appeals 
process established for the program; 

"(B) assistance with respect to the annual recertifi- 
cation and notification required under subsection (c)(6); 
and 

"(C) such other assistance with obtaining services as 
the Secretary, by regulation, shall require; and 
"(2) ensure that the System and such counselors comply 
with the requirements of subsection (h). 

"(e) Advice and Assistance Counseling. — An agreement en- 
tered into under subsection (a)(2)(A)(iii) shall require the entity to 
assign, as requested by an eligible beneficiary that is covered by 
such agreement, an advice and assistance counselor who shall pro- 
vide an eligible beneficiary with information regarding — 

"(1) accessing and coordinating long-term services and sup- 
ports in the most integrated setting; 

"(2) possible eligibility for other benefits and services; 
"(3) development of a service and support plan; 
"(4) information about programs established under the As- 
sistive Technology Act of 1998 and the services offered under 
such programs; 

"(5) available assistance with decision making concerning 
medical care, including the right to accept or refuse medical or 
surgical treatment and the right to formulate advance direc- 
tives or other written instructions recognized under State law, 
such as a living will or durable power of attorney for health 
care, in the case that an injury or illness causes the individual 
to be unable to make health care decisions; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 8002N320B PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



786 



"(6) such other services as the Secretary, by regulation, 
may require. 

"(f) No Effect on Eligibility for Other Benefits. — Benefits 
paid to an eligible beneficiary under the CLASS program shall be 
disregarded for purposes of determining or continuing the bene- 
ficiary's eligibility for receipt of benefits under any other Federal, 
State, or locally funded assistance program, including benefits paid 
under titles II, XVI, XVIII, XIX, or XXI of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 401 et seq., 1381 et seq., 1395 et seq., 1396 et seq., 
1397aa et seq.), under the laws administered by the Secretary of 
Veterans Affairs, under low-income housing assistance programs, 
or under the supplemental nutrition assistance program estab- 
lished under the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et 
seq.). 

"(g) Rule of Construction. — Nothing in this title shall be 
construed as prohibiting benefits paid under the CLASS Independ- 
ence Benefit Plan from being used to compensate a family caregiver 
for providing community living assistance services and supports to 
an eligible beneficiary. 

"(h) Protection Against Conflict of Interests. — The Sec- 
retary shall establish procedures to ensure that the Eligibility As- 
sessment System, the Protection and Advocacy System for a State, 
advocacy counselors for eligible beneficiaries, and any other entities 
that provide services to active enrollees and eligible beneficiaries 
under the CLASS program comply with the following: 

"(1) If the entity provides counseling or planning services, 
such services are provided in a manner that fosters the best in- 
terests of the active enrollee or beneficiary. 

"(2) The entity has established operating procedures that 
are designed to avoid or minimize conflicts of interest between 
the entity and an active enrollee or beneficiary. 

"(3) The entity provides information about all services and 
options available to the active enrollee or beneficiary, to the 
best of its knowledge, including services available through 
other entities or providers. 

"(4) The entity assists the active enrollee or beneficiary to 
access desired services, regardless of the provider. 

"(5) The entity reports the number of active enrollees and 
beneficiaries provided with assistance by age, disability, and 
whether such enrollees and beneficiaries received services from 
the entity or another entity. 

"(6) If the entity provides counseling or planning services, 
the entity ensures that an active enrollee or beneficiary is in- 
formed of any financial interest that the entity has in a service 
provider. 

"(7) The entity provides an active enrollee or beneficiary 
with a list of available service providers that can meet the 
needs of the active enrollee or beneficiary. 

"SEC. 3206 [42 U.S.C. 30011-5]. CLASS INDEPENDENCE FUND. 

"(a) Establishment of CLASS Independence Fund. — There 
is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to 
be known as the 'CLASS Independence Fund'. The Secretary of the 
Treasury shall serve as Managing Trustee of such Fund. The Fund 

June 9, 2010 



787 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 8002\3206 PHSA 



shall consist of all amounts derived from payments into the Fund 
under sections 3204(f) and 3205(c)(5)(C)(ii), and remaining after in- 
vestment of such amounts under subsection (b), including addi- 
tional amounts derived as income from such investments. The 
amounts held in the Fund are appropriated and shall remain avail- 
able without fiscal year limitation — 

"(1) to be held for investment on behalf of individuals en- 
rolled in the CLASS program; 

"(2) to pay the administrative expenses related to the Fund 
and to investment under subsection (b); and 

"(3) to pay cash benefits to eligible beneficiaries under the 
CLASS Independence Benefit Plan. 

"(b) Investment of Fund Balance. — The Secretary of the 
Treasury shall invest and manage the CLASS Independence Fund 
in the same manner, and to the same extent, as the Federal Sup- 
plementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund may be invested and 
managed under subsections (c), (d), and (e) of section 1841(d) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395t). 
"(c) Board of Trustees. — 

"(1) In general. — With respect to the CLASS Independ- 
ence Fund, there is hereby created a body to be known as the 
Board of Trustees of the CLASS Independence Fund (herein- 
after in this section referred to as the 'Board of Trustees') com- 
posed of the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Labor, 
and the Secretary of Health and Human Services, all ex officio, 
and of two members of the public (both of whom may not be 
from the same political party), who shall be nominated by the 
President for a term of 4 years and subject to confirmation by 
the Senate. A member of the Board of Trustees serving as a 
member of the public and nominated and confirmed to fill a va- 
cancy occurring during a term shall be nominated and con- 
firmed only for the remainder of such term. An individual nom- 
inated and confirmed as a member of the public may serve in 
such position after the expiration of such member's term until 
the earlier of the time at which the member's successor takes 
office or the time at which a report of the Board is first issued 
under paragraph (2) after the expiration of the member's term. 
The Secretary of the Treasury shall be the Managing Trustee 
of the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall meet not 
less frequently than once each calendar year. A person serving 
on the Board of Trustees shall not be considered to be a fidu- 
ciary and shall not be personally liable for actions taken in 
such capacity with respect to the Trust Fund. 
"(2) Duties.— 

"(A) In general. — It shall be the duty of the Board of 
Trustees to do the following: 

"(i) Hold the CLASS Independence Fund, 
"(ii) Report to the Congress not later than the first 
day of April of each year on the operation and status 
of the CLASS Independence Fund during the pre- 
ceding fiscal year and on its expected operation and 
status during the current fiscal year and the next 2 
fiscal years. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 8002X3207 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



788 



"(iii) Report immediately to the Congress when- 
ever the Board is of the opinion that the amount of the 
CLASS Independence Fund is not actuarially sound in 
regards to the projection under section 3203(b)(l)(B)(i). 

"(iv) Review the general policies followed in man- 
aging the CLASS Independence Fund, and recommend 
changes in such policies, including necessary changes 
in the provisions of law which govern the way in 
which the CLASS Independence Fund is to be man- 
aged. 

"(B) Report. — The report provided for in subpara- 
graph (A)(ii) shall — 
"(i) include — 

"(I) a statement of the assets of, and the dis- 
bursements made from, the CLASS Independence 
Fund during the preceding fiscal year; 

"(II) an estimate of the expected income to, 
and disbursements to be made from, the CLASS 
Independence Fund during the current fiscal year 
and each of the next 2 fiscal years; 

"(III) a statement of the actuarial status of 
the CLASS Independence Fund for the current fis- 
cal year, each of the next 2 fiscal years, and as 
projected over the 75-year period beginning with 
the current fiscal year; and 

"(IV) an actuarial opinion by the Chief Actu- 
ary of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Serv- 
ices certifying that the techniques and methodolo- 
gies used are generally accepted within the actu- 
arial profession and that the assumptions and cost 
estimates used are reasonable; and 
"(ii) be printed as a House document of the session 
of the Congress to which the report is made. 
"(C) Recommendations. — If the Board of Trustees de- 
termines that enrollment trends and expected future ben- 
efit claims on the CLASS Independence Fund are not actu- 
arially sound in regards to the projection under section 
3203(b)(l)(B)(i) and are unlikely to be resolved with rea- 
sonable premium increases or through other means, the 
Board of Trustees shall include in the report provided for 
in subparagraph (A)(ii) recommendations for such legisla- 
tive action as the Board of Trustees determine to be appro- 
priate, including whether to adjust monthly premiums or 
impose a temporary moratorium on new enrollments. 

"SEC. 3207 [42 U.S.C. 30011-6]. CLASS INDEPENDENCE ADVISORY COUN- 
CIL. 

"(a) Establishment. — There is hereby created an Advisory 
Committee to be known as the 'CLASS Independence Advisory 
Council'. 

"(b) Membership. — 

"(1) In general. — The CLASS Independence Advisory 

Council shall be composed of not more than 15 individuals, not 

otherwise in the employ of the United States — 

June 9, 2010 



789 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 8002X3208 PHSA 



"(A) who shall be appointed by the President without 
regard to the civil service laws and regulations; and 

"(B) a majority of whom shall be representatives of in- 
dividuals who participate or are likely to participate in the 
CLASS program, and shall include representatives of older 
and younger workers, individuals with disabilities, family 
caregivers of individuals who require services and supports 
to maintain their independence at home or in another resi- 
dential setting of their choice in the community, individ- 
uals with expertise in long-term care or disability insur- 
ance, actuarial science, economics, and other relevant dis- 
ciplines, as determined by the Secretary. 
"(2) Terms.— 

"(A) In general. — The members of the CLASS Inde- 
pendence Advisory Council shall serve overlapping terms 
of 3 years (unless appointed to fill a vacancy occurring 
prior to the expiration of a term, in which case the indi- 
vidual shall serve for the remainder of the term). 

"(B) Limitation. — A member shall not be eligible to 
serve for more than 2 consecutive terms. 
"(3) Chair. — The President shall, from time to time, ap- 
point one of the members of the CLASS Independence Advisory 
Council to serve as the Chair. 

"(c) Duties. — The CLASS Independence Advisory Council shall 
advise the Secretary on matters of general policy in the administra- 
tion of the CLASS program established under this title and in the 
formulation of regulations under this title including with respect 
to— 

"(1) the development of the CLASS Independence Benefit 
Plan under section 3203; 

"(2) the determination of monthly premiums under such 
plan; and 

"(3) the financial solvency of the program. 
"(d) Application of FACA. — The Federal Advisory Committee 
Act (5 U.S.C. App.), other than section 14 of that Act, shall apply 
to the CLASS Independence Advisory Council. 
"(e) Authorization of Appropriations. — 

"(1) In general. — There are authorized to be appropriated 
to the CLASS Independence Advisory Council to carry out its 
duties under this section, such sums as may be necessary for 
fiscal year 2011 and for each fiscal year thereafter. 

"(2) Availability. — Any sums appropriated under the au- 
thorization contained in this section shall remain available, 
without fiscal year limitation, until expended. 

"SEC. 3208 [42 U.S.C. 30011-7]. SOLVENCY AND FISCAL INDEPENDENCE; 
REGULATIONS; ANNUAL REPORT. 

"(a) Solvency. — The Secretary shall regularly consult with the 
Board of Trustees of the CLASS Independence Fund and the 
CLASS Independence Advisory Council, for purposes of ensuring 
that enrollees premiums are adequate to ensure the financial sol- 
vency of the CLASS program, both with respect to fiscal years oc- 
curring in the near-term and fiscal years occurring over 20- and 75- 
year periods, taking into account the projections required for such 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 8002N3209 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



790 



periods under subsections (a)(l)(A)(i) and (b)(l)(B)(i) of section 
3202. 

"(b) No Taxpayer Funds Used To Pay Benefits. — No tax- 
payer funds shall be used for payment of benefits under a CLASS 
Independent Benefit Plan. For purposes of this subsection, the 
term 'taxpayer funds' means any Federal funds from a source other 
than premiums deposited by CLASS program participants in the 
CLASS Independence Fund and any associated interest earnings. 

"(c) Regulations. — The Secretary shall promulgate such regu- 
lations as are necessary to carry out the CLASS program in accord- 
ance with this title. Such regulations shall include provisions to 
prevent fraud and abuse under the program. 

"(d) Annual Report. — Beginning January 1, 2014, the Sec- 
retary shall submit an annual report to Congress on the CLASS 
program. Each report shall include the following: 

"(1) The total number of enrollees in the program. 

"(2) The total number of eligible beneficiaries during the 

fiscal year. 

"(3) The total amount of cash benefits provided during the 
fiscal year. 

"(4) A description of instances of fraud or abuse identified 
during the fiscal year. 

"(5) Recommendations for such administrative or legisla- 
tive action as the Secretary determines is necessary to improve 
the program, ensure the solvency of the program, or to prevent 
the occurrence of fraud or abuse. 

"SEC. 3209 [42 U.S.C. 30011-8]. INSPECTOR GENERAL'S REPORT. 

"The Inspector General of the Department of Health and 
Human Services shall submit an annual report to the Secretary 
and Congress relating to the overall progress of the CLASS pro- 
gram and of the existence of waste, fraud, and abuse in the CLASS 
program. Each such report shall include findings in the following 
areas: 

"(1) The eligibility determination process. 
"(2) The provision of cash benefits. 

"(3) Quality assurance and protection against waste, fraud, 
and abuse. 

"(4) Recouping of unpaid and accrued benefits. 
"SEC. 3210 [42 U.S.C. 30011-9]. TAX TREATMENT OF PROGRAM. 

"The CLASS program shall be treated for purposes of the In- 
ternal Revenue Code of 1986 in the same manner as a qualified 
long-term care insurance contract for qualified long-term care serv- 
ices.". 

(2) Conforming amendments to medicaid. — Section 
1902(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)), as 
amended by section 6505, is amended by inserting after para- 
graph (80) the following: 

"(81) provide that the State will comply with such regula- 
tions regarding the application of primary and secondary payor 
rules with respect to individuals who are eligible for medical 
assistance under this title and are eligible beneficiaries under 
the CLASS program established under title XXXII of the Pub- 
lic Health Service Act as the Secretary shall establish; and". 

June 9, 2010 



791 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 8002 



(b) Assurance of Adequate Infrastructure for the Provi- 
sion of Personal Care Attendant Workers. — Section 1902(a) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)), as amended by sub- 
section (a)(2), is amended by inserting after paragraph (81) the fol- 
lowing: 

"(82) provide that, not later than 2 years after the date of 
enactment of the Community Living Assistance Services and 
Supports Act, each State shall — 

"(A) assess the extent to which entities such as pro- 
viders of home care, home health services, home and com- 
munity service providers, public authorities created to pro- 
vide personal care services to individuals eligible for med- 
ical assistance under the State plan, and nonprofit organi- 
zations, are serving or have the capacity to serve as fiscal 
agents for, employers of, and providers of employment-re- 
lated benefits for, personal care attendant workers who 
provide personal care services to individuals receiving ben- 
efits under the CLASS program established under title 
XXXII of the Public Health Service Act, including in rural 
and underserved areas; 

"(B) designate or create such entities to serve as fiscal 
agents for, employers of, and providers of employment-re- 
lated benefits for, such workers to ensure an adequate sup- 
ply of the workers for individuals receiving benefits under 
the CLASS program, including in rural and underserved 
areas; and 

"(C) ensure that the designation or creation of such 
entities will not negatively alter or impede existing pro- 
grams, models, methods, or administration of service deliv- 
ery that provide for consumer controlled or self-directed 
home and community services and further ensure that 
such entities will not impede the ability of individuals to 
direct and control their home and community services, in- 
cluding the ability to select, manage, dismiss, co-employ, 
or employ such workers or inhibit such individuals from 
relying on family members for the provision of personal 
care services.". 

(c) Personal Care Attendants Workforce Advisory 
Panel. — 

(1) Establishment. — Not later than 90 days after the date 
of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services shall establish a Personal Care Attendants Workforce 
Advisory Panel for the purpose of examining and advising the 
Secretary and Congress on workforce issues related to personal 
care attendant workers, including with respect to the adequacy 
of the number of such workers, the salaries, wages, and bene- 
fits of such workers, and access to the services provided by 
such workers. 

(2) Membership. — In appointing members to the Personal 
Care Attendants Workforce Advisory Panel, the Secretary shall 
ensure that such members include the following: 

(A) Individuals with disabilities of all ages. 

(B) Senior individuals. 

(C) Representatives of individuals with disabilities. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 8002 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



792 



(D) Representatives of senior individuals. 

(E) Representatives of workforce and labor organiza- 
tions. 

(F) Representatives of home and community-based 
service providers. 

(G) Representatives of assisted living providers. 

(d) Inclusion of CLASS Program Information in the Na- 
tional Clearinghouse for Long-term Care Information; Ex- 
tension of Funding. — [As revised by section 10801(b)~\ Section 
6021(d) of the Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 (42 U.S.C. 1396p note) 
is amended — 

(1) in paragraph (2)(A) — 

(A) in clause (ii), by striking "and" at the end; 

(B) in clause (iii), by striking the period at the end and 
inserting "; and"; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following: 

"(iv) include information regarding the CLASS 
program established under title XXXII of the Public 
Health Service Act and information regarding how 
benefits provided under a CLASS Independence Ben- 
efit Plan differ from disability insurance benefits. [As 
revised by section 10801(c)Y\ and 

(2) in paragraph (3), by striking "2010" and inserting 
"2015". 

(e) Effective Date. — The amendments made by subsections 
(a), (b), and (d) take effect on January 1, 2011. 

(f) Rule of Construction. — Nothing in this title or the 
amendments made by this title are intended to replace or displace 
public or private disability insurance benefits, including such bene- 
fits that are for income replacement. 



793 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9001X49801 IRC 



TITLE IX— REVENUE PROVISIONS 
Subtitle A — Revenue Offset Provisions 

SEC. 9001. EXCISE TAX ON HIGH COST EMPLOYER-SPONSORED 
HEALTH COVERAGE. 

(a) In General. — Chapter 43 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986, as amended by section 1513, is amended by adding at the 
end the following: 

"SEC. 49801. EXCISE TAX ON HIGH COST EMPLOYER-SPONSORED 
HEALTH COVERAGE. 

"(a) Imposition of Tax. — If— 

"(1) an employee is covered under any applicable employer- 
sponsored coverage of an employer at any time during a tax- 
able period, and 

"(2) there is any excess benefit with respect to the cov- 
erage, 

there is hereby imposed a tax equal to 40 percent of the excess ben- 
efit. 

"(b) Excess Benefit. — For purposes of this section — 

"(1) In general. — The term 'excess benefit' means, with 
respect to any applicable employer-sponsored coverage made 
available by an employer to an employee during any taxable 
period, the sum of the excess amounts determined under para- 
graph (2) for months during the taxable period. 

"(2) Monthly excess amount. — The excess amount deter- 
mined under this paragraph for any month is the excess (if 
any) of — 

"(A) the aggregate cost of the applicable employer- 
sponsored coverage of the employee for the month, over 

"(B) an amount equal to Viz of the annual limitation 
under paragraph (3) for the calendar year in which the 
month occurs. 

"(3) Annual limitation. — For purposes of this sub- 
section — 

"(A) In GENERAL. — The annual limitation under this 
paragraph for any calendar year is the dollar limit deter- 
mined under subparagraph (C) for the calendar year. 

"(B) Applicable annual limitation. — [As revised by 
section 1401(a) ofHCERA] 

"(i) In general. — Except as provided in clause (ii), 
the annual limitation which applies for any month 
shall be determined on the basis of the type of cov- 
erage (as determined under subsection (f)(1)) provided 
to the employee by the employer as of the beginning 
of the month. 

"(ii) Multiemployer plan coverage. — Any cov- 
erage provided under a multiemployer plan (as defined 
in section 414(f)) shall be treated as coverage other 
than self-only coverage. [As added by section 
1401(a)(l)(B)of HCERA] 

"(C) Applicable dollar limit. — [As revised by section 
1401(a)(2) ofHCERA] 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9001X49801 IRC 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



794 



"(i) 2018.— In the case of 2018, the dollar limit 
under this subparagraph is — 

"(I) in the case of an employee with self-only 
coverage, $10,200 multiplied by the health cost 
adjustment percentage (determined by only taking 
into account self-only coverage), and 

"(II) in the case of an employee with coverage 
other than self-only coverage, $27,500 multiplied 
by the health cost adjustment percentage (deter- 
mined by only taking into account coverage other 
than self-only coverage). 

"(ii) Health cost adjustment percentage. — For 
purposes of clause (i), the health cost adjustment per- 
centage is equal to 100 percent plus the excess (if any) 
of— 

"(I) the percentage by which the per employee 
cost for providing coverage under the Blue Cross/ 
Blue Shield standard benefit option under the 
Federal Employees Health Benefits Plan for plan 
year 2018 (determined by using the benefit pack- 
age for such coverage in 2010) exceeds such cost 
for plan year 2010, over 

"(II) 55 percent, 
"(hi) Age and gender adjustment. — 

"(I) In general. — The amount determined 
under subclause (I) or (II) of clause (i), whichever 
is applicable, for any taxable period shall be in- 
creased by the amount determined under sub- 
clause (II). 

"(II) Amount determined. — The amount de- 
termined under this subclause is an amount equal 
to the excess (if any) of — 

"(aa) the premium cost of the Blue Cross/ 
Blue Shield standard benefit option under the 
Federal Employees Health Benefits Plan for 
the type of coverage provided such individual 
in such taxable period if priced for the age 
and gender characteristics of all employees of 
the individual's employer, over 

"(bb) that premium cost for the provision 
of such coverage under such option in such 
taxable period if priced for the age and gender 
characteristics of the national workforce, 
"(iv) Exception for certain individuals. — In the 
case of an individual who is a qualified retiree or who 
participates in a plan sponsored by an employer the 
majority of whose employees covered by the plan are 
engaged in a high-risk profession or employed to re- 
pair or install electrical or telecommunications lines — 
[As revised by section 1401(a)(2) ofHCERA] 

"(I) the dollar amount in clause (i)(I) shall be 
increased by $1,650, and 

June 9, 2010 



795 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9001X49801 IRC 



"(II) the dollar amount in clause (i)(II) shall 
be increased by $3,450, [sic-final punctuation in- 
correct] 

"(v) Subsequent years. — In the case of any cal- 
endar year after 2018, each of the dollar amounts 
under clauses (i) (after the application of clause (ii)) 
and (iv) shall be increased to the amount equal to such 
amount as in effect for the calendar year preceding 
such year, increased by an amount equal to the prod- 
uct of — 

"(I) such amount as so in effect, multiplied by 
"(II) the cost-of-living adjustment determined 
under section 1(f)(3) for such year (determined by 
substituting the calendar year that is 2 years be- 
fore such year for '1992' in subparagraph (B) 
thereof), increased by 1 percentage point in the 
case of determinations for calendar years begin- 
ning before 2020. 
If any amount determined under this clause is not a 
multiple of $50, such amount shall be rounded to the 
nearest multiple of $50. [Note: a subparagraph (D) 
was stricken by section 1401(a)(3) of HCERA] 
"(c) Liability To Pay Tax. — 

"(1) In general. — Each coverage provider shall pay the 
tax imposed by subsection (a) on its applicable share of the ex- 
cess benefit with respect to an employee for any taxable period. 

"(2) Coverage provider. — For purposes of this subsection, 
the term 'coverage provider' means each of the following: 

"(A) Health insurance coverage. — If the applicable 
employer-sponsored coverage consists of coverage under a 
group health plan which provides health insurance cov- 
erage, the health insurance issuer. 

"(B) HSA and msa contributions. — If the applicable 
employer-sponsored coverage consists of coverage under an 
arrangement under which the employer makes contribu- 
tions described in subsection (b) or (d) of section 106, the 
employer. 

"(C) Other coverage. — In the case of any other appli- 
cable employer-sponsored coverage, the person that admin- 
isters the plan benefits. 

"(3) Applicable share. — For purposes of this subsection, a 
coverage provider's applicable share of an excess benefit for 
any taxable period is the amount which bears the same ratio 
to the amount of such excess benefit as — 

"(A) the cost of the applicable employer-sponsored cov- 
erage provided by the provider to the employee during 
such period, bears to 

"(B) the aggregate cost of all applicable employer-spon- 
sored coverage provided to the employee by all coverage 
providers during such period. 

"(4) Responsibility to calculate tax and applicable 

SHARES. — 

"(A) In general. — Each employer shall — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9001X49801 IRC 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



796 



"(i) calculate for each taxable period the amount of 
the excess benefit subject to the tax imposed by sub- 
section (a) and the applicable share of such excess ben- 
efit for each coverage provider, and 

"(ii) notify, at such time and in such manner as 
the Secretary may prescribe, the Secretary and each 
coverage provider of the amount so determined for the 
provider. 

"(B) Special rule for multiemployer plans. — In the 
case of applicable employer-sponsored coverage made 
available to employees through a multiemployer plan (as 
defined in section 414(f)), the plan sponsor shall make the 
calculations, and provide the notice, required under sub- 
paragraph (A). 

"(d) Applicable Employer-Sponsored Coverage; Cost. — For 
purposes of this section — 

"(1) Applicable employer-sponsored coverage. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'applicable employer- 
sponsored coverage' means, with respect to any employee, 
coverage under any group health plan made available to 
the employee by an employer which is excludable from the 
employee's gross income under section 106, or would be so 
excludable if it were employer-provided coverage (within 
the meaning of such section 106). 

"(B) Exceptions. — The term 'applicable employer- 
sponsored coverage' shall not include — 

"(i) any coverage (whether through insurance or 
otherwise) described in section 9832(c)(1) (other than 
subparagraph (G) thereof) or for long-term care, or [As 
revised by section 10901(b)] 

"(ii) any policy under a separate policy, certificate, 
or contract of insurance which provides benefits sub- 
stantially all of which are for treatment of the mouth 
(including any organ or structure within the mouth) or 
for treatment of the eye, or JAs added by section 
1401(a)(4) ofHCERA} 

"(hi) any coverage described in section 9832(c)(3) 
the payment for which is not excludable from gross in- 
come and for which a deduction under section 162(1) is 
not allowable. 

"(C) Coverage includes employee paid portion. — 
Coverage shall be treated as applicable employer-spon- 
sored coverage without regard to whether the employer or 
employee pays for the coverage. 

"(D) Self-employed individual. — In the case of an in- 
dividual who is an employee within the meaning of section 
401(c)(1), coverage under any group health plan providing 
health insurance coverage shall be treated as applicable 
employer-sponsored coverage if a deduction is allowable 
under section 162(1) with respect to all or any portion of 
the cost of the coverage. 

"(E) Governmental plans included. — Applicable em- 
ployer-sponsored coverage shall include coverage under 
any group health plan established and maintained pri- 

June 9, 2010 



797 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9001X49801 IRC 



marily for its civilian employees by the Government of the 
United States, by the government of any State or political 
subdivision thereof, or by any agency or instrumentality of 
any such government. 
"(2) Determination of cost. — 

"(A) In general. — The cost of applicable employer- 
sponsored coverage shall be determined under rules simi- 
lar to the rules of section 4980B(f)(4), except that in deter- 
mining such cost, any portion of the cost of such coverage 
which is attributable to the tax imposed under this section 
shall not be taken into account and the amount of such 
cost shall be calculated separately for self-only coverage 
and other coverage. In the case of applicable employer- 
sponsored coverage which provides coverage to retired em- 
ployees, the plan may elect to treat a retired employee who 
has not attained the age of 65 and a retired employee who 
has attained the age of 65 as similarly situated bene- 
ficiaries. 

"(B) Health fsas. — In the case of applicable em- 
ployer-sponsored coverage consisting of coverage under a 
flexible spending arrangement (as defined in section 
106(c)(2)), the cost of the coverage shall be equal to the 
sum of — 

"(i) the amount of employer contributions under 
any salary reduction election under the arrangement, 
plus 

"(ii) the amount determined under subparagraph 
(A) with respect to any reimbursement under the ar- 
rangement in excess of the contributions described in 
clause (i). 

"(C) Archer msas and hsas. — In the case of applica- 
ble employer-sponsored coverage consisting of coverage 
under an arrangement under which the employer makes 
contributions described in subsection (b) or (d) of section 
106, the cost of the coverage shall be equal to the amount 
of employer contributions under the arrangement. 

"(D) Allocation on a monthly basis. — If cost is de- 
termined on other than a monthly basis, the cost shall be 
allocated to months in a taxable period on such basis as 
the Secretary may prescribe. 

"(3) Employee. — The term 'employee' includes any former 
employee, surviving spouse, or other primary insured indi- 
vidual. [As added by section 1401(a)(5) ofHCERA] 
"(e) Penalty for Failure To Properly Calculate Excess 
Benefit. — 

"(1) In general. — If, for any taxable period, the tax im- 
posed by subsection (a) exceeds the tax determined under such 
subsection with respect to the total excess benefit calculated by 
the employer or plan sponsor under subsection (c)(4) — 

"(A) each coverage provider shall pay the tax on its ap- 
plicable share (determined in the same manner as under 
subsection (c)(4)) of the excess, but no penalty shall be im- 
posed on the provider with respect to such amount, and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9001X49801 IRC 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



798 



"(B) the employer or plan sponsor shall, in addition to 
any tax imposed by subsection (a), pay a penalty in an 
amount equal to such excess, plus interest at the under- 
payment rate determined under section 6621 for the period 
beginning on the due date for the payment of tax imposed 
by subsection (a) to which the excess relates and ending on 
the date of payment of the penalty. 
"(2) Limitations on penalty. — 

"(A) Penalty not to apply where failure not dis- 
covered exercising reasonable diligence. — No penalty 
shall be imposed by paragraph (1)(B) on any failure to 
properly calculate the excess benefit during any period for 
which it is established to the satisfaction of the Secretary 
that the employer or plan sponsor neither knew, nor exer- 
cising reasonable diligence would have known, that such 
failure existed. 

"(B) Penalty not to apply to failures corrected 
within 30 days. — No penalty shall be imposed by para- 
graph (1)(B) on any such failure if — 

"(i) such failure was due to reasonable cause and 
not to willful neglect, and 

"(ii) such failure is corrected during the 30-day pe- 
riod beginning on the 1st date that the employer 
knew, or exercising reasonable diligence would have 
known, that such failure existed. 

"(C) Waiver by secretary. — In the case of any such 
failure which is due to reasonable cause and not to willful 
neglect, the Secretary may waive part or all of the penalty 
imposed by paragraph (1), to the extent that the payment 
of such penalty would be excessive or otherwise inequi- 
table relative to the failure involved. 
"(f) Other Definitions and Special Rules. — For purposes of 
this section — 

"(1) Coverage determinations. — 

"(A) In general. — Except as provided in subpara- 
graph (B), an employee shall be treated as having self-only 
coverage with respect to any applicable employer-spon- 
sored coverage of an employer. 

"(B) Minimum essential coverage. — An employee 
shall be treated as having coverage other than self-only 
coverage only if the employee is enrolled in coverage other 
than self-only coverage in a group health plan which pro- 
vides minimum essential coverage (as defined in section 
5000A(f)) to the employee and at least one other bene- 
ficiary, and the benefits provided under such minimum es- 
sential coverage do not vary based on whether any indi- 
vidual covered under such coverage is the employee or an- 
other beneficiary. 

"(2) Qualified retiree. — The term 'qualified retiree' 
means any individual who — 

"(A) is receiving coverage by reason of being a retiree, 
"(B) has attained age 55, and 

June 9, 2010 



799 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9001X49801 IRC 



"(C) is not entitled to benefits or eligible for enroll- 
ment under the Medicare program under title XVIII of the 
Social Security Act. 

"(3) Employees engaged in high-risk profession. — The 
term 'employees engaged in a high-risk profession' means law 
enforcement officers (as such term is defined in section 1204 of 
the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968), em- 
ployees in fire protection activities (as such term is defined in 
section 3(y) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938), individ- 
uals who provide out-of-hospital emergency medical care (in- 
cluding emergency medical technicians, paramedics, and first- 
responders), individuals whose primary work is longshore work 
(as denned in section 258(b) of the Immigration and Nation- 
ality Act (8 U.S.C. 1288(b)), determined without regard to 
paragraph (2) thereof), and individuals engaged in the con- 
struction, mining, agriculture (not including food processing), 
forestry, and fishing industries. Such term includes an em- 
ployee who is retired from a high-risk profession described in 
the preceding sentence, if such employee satisfied the require- 
ments of such sentence for a period of not less than 20 years 
during the employee's employment. [As revised by section 
10901(a)] 

"(4) Group health plan. — The term 'group health plan' 
has the meaning given such term by section 5000(b)(1). 

"(5) Health insurance coverage; health insurance 
issuer. — 

"(A) Health insurance coverage. — The term 'health 
insurance coverage' has the meaning given such term by 
section 9832(b)(1) (applied without regard to subparagraph 
(B) thereof, except as provided by the Secretary in regula- 
tions). 

"(B) Health insurance issuer. — The term 'health in- 
surance issuer' has the meaning given such term by sec- 
tion 9832(b)(2). 

"(6) Person that administers the plan benefits. — The 
term 'person that administers the plan benefits' shall include 
the plan sponsor if the plan sponsor administers benefits under 
the plan. 

"(7) Plan sponsor. — The term 'plan sponsor' has the 
meaning given such term in section 3(16)(B) of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974. 

"(8) Taxable period. — The term 'taxable period' means the 
calendar year or such shorter period as the Secretary may pre- 
scribe. The Secretary may have different taxable periods for 
employers of varying sizes. 

"(9) Aggregation rules. — All employers treated as a sin- 
gle employer under subsection (b), (c), (m), or (o) of section 414 
shall be treated as a single employer. 

"(10) Denial of deduction. — For denial of a deduction for 
the tax imposed by this section, see section 275(a)(6). 
"(g) Regulations. — The Secretary shall prescribe such regula- 
tions as may be necessary to carry out this section.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9001 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



800 



(b) Clerical Amendment. — The table of sections for chapter 
43 of such Code, as amended by section 1513, is amended by add- 
ing at the end the following new item: 

"Sec. 49801. Excise tax on high cost employer-sponsored health coverage.". 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2017. 
[As revised by section 1401(b)(1) of HCERA] 

SEC. 9002. INCLUSION OF COST OF EMPLOYER-SPONSORED HEALTH 
COVERAGE ON W-2. 

(a) In General. — Section 6051(a) of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986 (relating to receipts for employees) is amended by striking 
"and" at the end of paragraph (12), by striking the period at the 
end of paragraph (13) and inserting ", and", and by adding after 
paragraph (13) the following new paragraph: 

"(14) the aggregate cost (determined under rules similar to 
the rules of section 4980B(f)(4)) of applicable employer-spon- 
sored coverage (as defined in section 49801(d)(1)), except that 
this paragraph shall not apply to — 

"(A) coverage to which paragraphs (11) and (12) apply, 

or 

"(B) the amount of any salary reduction contributions 
to a flexible spending arrangement (within the meaning of 
section 125).". 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2010. 

SEC. 9003. DISTRIBUTIONS FOR MEDICINE QUALIFIED ONLY IF FOR 
PRESCRIBED DRUG OR INSULIN. 

(a) HSAs.— Subparagraph (A) of section 223(d)(2) of the Inter- 
nal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing: "Such term shall include an amount paid for medicine or 
a drug only if such medicine or drug is a prescribed drug (deter- 
mined without regard to whether such drug is available without a 
prescription) or is insulin.". 

(b) Archer MSAs. — Subparagraph (A) of section 220(d)(2) of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the 
end the following: "Such term shall include an amount paid for 
medicine or a drug only if such medicine or drug is a prescribed 
drug (determined without regard to whether such drug is available 
without a prescription) or is insulin.". 

(c) Health Flexible Spending Arrangements and Health 
Reimbursement Arrangements. — Section 106 of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following 
new subsection: 

"(f) Reimbursements for Medicine Restricted to Pre- 
scribed Drugs and Insulin. — For purposes of this section and sec- 
tion 105, reimbursement for expenses incurred for a medicine or a 
drug shall be treated as a reimbursement for medical expenses only 
if such medicine or drug is a prescribed drug (determined without 
regard to whether such drug is available without a prescription) or 
is insulin.". 

(d) Effective Dates. — 

(1) Distributions from savings accounts. — The amend- 
ments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall apply to amounts 

June 9, 2010 



801 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9006 



paid with respect to taxable years beginning after December 
31,2010. 

(2) Reimbursements. — The amendment made by sub- 
section (c) shall apply to expenses incurred with respect to tax- 
able years beginning after December 31, 2010. 

SEC. 9004. INCREASE IN ADDITIONAL TAX ON DISTRIBUTIONS FROM 
HSAS AND ARCHER MSAS NOT USED FOR QUALIFIED MED- 
ICAL EXPENSES. 

(a) HSAs.— Section 223(f)(4)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 is amended by striking "10 percent" and inserting "20 per- 
cent". 

(b) Archer MSAs.— Section 220(f)(4)(A) of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986 is amended by striking "15 percent" and insert- 
ing "20 percent". 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to distributions made after December 31, 2010. 

SEC. 9005. LIMITATION ON HEALTH FLEXIBLE SPENDING ARRANGE- 
MENTS UNDER CAFETERIA PLANS. 

(a) In General. — Section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 is amended — 

(1) by redesignating subsections (i) and (j) as subsections 
(j) and (k), respectively, and 

(2) by inserting after subsection (h) the following new sub- 
section: 

"(i) Limitation on Health Flexible Spending Arrange- 
ments. — {Replaced by section 10902(a)~\ 

"(1) In general. — For purposes of this section, if a benefit 
is provided under a cafeteria plan through employer contribu- 
tions to a health flexible spending arrangement, such benefit 
shall not be treated as a qualified benefit unless the cafeteria 
plan provides that an employee may not elect for any taxable 
year to have salary reduction contributions in excess of $2,500 
made to such arrangement. 

"(2) Adjustment for inflation. — [As revised by section 
1403(b) of HCERAJ In the case of any taxable year beginning 
after December 31, 2013, the dollar amount in paragraph (1) 
shall be increased by an amount equal to — 
"(A) such amount, multiplied by 

"(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under 
section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which such taxable 
year begins by substituting 'calendar year 2012' for 'cal- 
endar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof. 
If any increase determined under this paragraph is not a mul- 
tiple of $50, such increase shall be rounded to the next lowest 
multiple of $50.". 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2010. 

SEC. 9006. EXPANSION OF INFORMATION REPORTING REQUIREMENTS. 

(a) In General. — Section 6041 of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new sub- 
sections: 

"(h) Application to Corporations. — Notwithstanding any 
regulation prescribed by the Secretary before the date of the enact- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9007 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



802 



ment of this subsection, for purposes of this section the term 'per- 
son' includes any corporation that is not an organization exempt 
from tax under section 501(a). 

"(i) Regulations. — The Secretary may prescribe such regula- 
tions and other guidance as may be appropriate or necessary to 
carry out the purposes of this section, including rules to prevent 
duplicative reporting of transactions.". 

(b) Payments for Property and Other Gross Proceeds. — 
Subsection (a) of section 6041 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
is amended — 

(1) by inserting "amounts in consideration for property," 
after "wages,", 

(2) by inserting "gross proceeds," after "emoluments, or 
other", and 

(3) by inserting "gross proceeds," after "setting forth the 
amount of such". 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to payments made after December 31, 2011. 

SEC. 9007. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CHARITABLE HOS- 
PITALS. 

(a) Requirements To Qualify as Section 501(c)(3) Chari- 
table Hospital Organization. — Section 501 of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986 (relating to exemption from tax on corporations, 
certain trusts, etc.) is amended by redesignating subsection (r) as 
subsection (s) and by inserting after subsection (q) the following 
new subsection: 

"(r) Additional Requirements for Certain Hospitals. — 

"(1) In general. — A hospital organization to which this 
subsection applies shall not be treated as described in sub- 
section (c)(3) unless the organization — 

"(A) meets the community health needs assessment re- 
quirements described in paragraph (3), 

"(B) meets the financial assistance policy requirements 
described in paragraph (4), 

"(C) meets the requirements on charges described in 
paragraph (5), and 

"(D) meets the billing and collection requirement de- 
scribed in paragraph (6). 

"(2) Hospital organizations to which subsection ap- 
plies. — 

"(A) In general. — This subsection shall apply to — 

"(i) an organization which operates a facility 
which is required by a State to be licensed, registered, 
or similarly recognized as a hospital, and 

"(ii) any other organization which the Secretary 
determines has the provision of hospital care as its 
principal function or purpose constituting the basis for 
its exemption under subsection (c)(3) (determined 
without regard to this subsection). 
"(B) Organizations with more than i hospital fa- 
cility. — If a hospital organization operates more than 1 
hospital facility — 

June 9, 2010 



803 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9007 



"(i) the organization shall meet the requirements 
of this subsection separately with respect to each such 
facility, and 

"(ii) the organization shall not be treated as de- 
scribed in subsection (c)(3) with respect to any such fa- 
cility for which such requirements are not separately 
met. 

"(3) Community health needs assessments. — 

"(A) In general. — An organization meets the require- 
ments of this paragraph with respect to any taxable year 
only if the organization — 

"(i) has conducted a community health needs as- 
sessment which meets the requirements of subpara- 
graph (B) in such taxable year or in either of the 2 
taxable years immediately preceding such taxable 
year, and 

"(ii) has adopted an implementation strategy to 
meet the community health needs identified through 
such assessment. 

"(B) Community health needs assessment. — A com- 
munity health needs assessment meets the requirements 
of this paragraph if such community health needs assess- 
ment — 

"(i) takes into account input from persons who 
represent the broad interests of the community served 
by the hospital facility, including those with special 
knowledge of or expertise in public health, and 
"(ii) is made widely available to the public. 
"(4) Financial assistance policy. — An organization 
meets the requirements of this paragraph if the organization 
establishes the following policies: 

"(A) Financial assistance policy. — A written finan- 
cial assistance policy which includes — 

"(i) eligibility criteria for financial assistance, and 
whether such assistance includes free or discounted 
care, 

"(ii) the basis for calculating amounts charged to 
patients, 

"(hi) the method for applying for financial assist- 
ance, 

"(iv) in the case of an organization which does not 
have a separate billing and collections policy, the ac- 
tions the organization may take in the event of non- 
payment, including collections action and reporting to 
credit agencies, and 

"(v) measures to widely publicize the policy within 
the community to be served by the organization. 
"(B) Policy relating to emergency medical care. — 
A written policy requiring the organization to provide, 
without discrimination, care for emergency medical condi- 
tions (within the meaning of section 1867 of the Social Se- 
curity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395dd)) to individuals regardless of 
their eligibility under the financial assistance policy de- 
scribed in subparagraph (A). 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9007X4959 IRC 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



804 



"(5) Limitation on charges. — An organization meets the 
requirements of this paragraph if the organization — 

"(A) limits amounts charged for emergency or other 
medically necessary care provided to individuals eligible 
for assistance under the financial assistance policy de- 
scribed in paragraph (4)(A) to not more than the amounts 
generally billed to individuals who have insurance cov- 
ering such care, and [As revised by section 10903(a)~\ 

"(B) prohibits the use of gross charges. 
"(6) Billing and collection requirements. — An organi- 
zation meets the requirement of this paragraph only if the or- 
ganization does not engage in extraordinary collection actions 
before the organization has made reasonable efforts to deter- 
mine whether the individual is eligible for assistance under the 
financial assistance policy described in paragraph (4)(A). 

"(7) Regulatory authority. — The Secretary shall issue 
such regulations and guidance as may be necessary to carry 
out the provisions of this subsection, including guidance relat- 
ing to what constitutes reasonable efforts to determine the eli- 
gibility of a patient under a financial assistance policy for pur- 
poses of paragraph (6).". 

(b) Excise Tax for Failures To Meet Hospital Exemption 
Requirements. — 

(1) In general. — Subchapter D of chapter 42 of the Inter- 
nal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to failure by certain chari- 
table organizations to meet certain qualification requirements) 
is amended by adding at the end the following new section: 

"SEC. 4959. TAXES ON FAILURES BY HOSPITAL ORGANIZATIONS. 

"If a hospital organization to which section 501(r) applies fails 
to meet the requirement of section 501(r)(3) for any taxable year, 
there is imposed on the organization a tax equal to $50,000.". 

(2) Conforming amendment. — The table of sections for 
subchapter D of chapter 42 of such Code is amended by adding 
at the end the following new item: 

"Sec. 4959. Taxes on failures by hospital organizations.". 

(c) Mandatory Review of Tax Exemption for Hospitals. — 
The Secretary of the Treasury or the Secretary's delegate shall re- 
view at least once every 3 years the community benefit activities 
of each hospital organization to which section 501(r) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this section) applies. 

(d) Additional Reporting Requirements. — 

(1) Community health needs assessments and audited 
financial statements. — Section 6033(b) of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986 (relating to certain organizations described 
in section 501(c)(3)) is amended by striking "and" at the end 
of paragraph (14), by redesignating paragraph (15) as para- 
graph (16), and by inserting after paragraph (14) the following 
new paragraph: 

"(15) in the case of an organization to which the require- 
ments of section 501(r) apply for the taxable year — 

"(A) a description of how the organization is address- 
ing the needs identified in each community health needs 
assessment conducted under section 501(r)(3) and a de- 
June 9, 2010 



805 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9007 



scription of any such needs that are not being addressed 
together with the reasons why such needs are not being 
addressed, and 

"(B) the audited financial statements of such organiza- 
tion (or, in the case of an organization the financial state- 
ments of which are included in a consolidated financial 
statement with other organizations, such consolidated fi- 
nancial statement).". 

(2) Taxes.— Section 6033(b)(10) of such Code is amended 
by striking "and" at the end of subparagraph (B), by inserting 
"and" at the end of subparagraph (C), and by adding at the end 
the following new subparagraph: 

"(D) section 4959 (relating to taxes on failures by hos- 
pital organizations),". 

(e) Reports. — 

(1) Report on levels of charity care. — The Secretary of 
the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services, shall submit to the Committees on Ways and 
Means, Education and Labor, and Energy and Commerce of 
the House of Representatives and to the Committees on Fi- 
nance and Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Sen- 
ate an annual report on the following: 

(A) Information with respect to private tax-exempt, 
taxable, and government-owned hospitals regarding — 

(i) levels of charity care provided, 

(ii) bad debt expenses, 

(iii) unreimbursed costs for services provided with 
respect to means-tested government programs, and 

(iv) unreimbursed costs for services provided with 
respect to non-means tested government programs. 

(B) Information with respect to private tax-exempt 
hospitals regarding costs incurred for community benefit 
activities. 

(2) Report on trends. — 

(A) Study. — The Secretary of the Treasury, in con- 
sultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices, shall conduct a study on trends in the information re- 
quired to be reported under paragraph (1). 

(B) Report. — Not later than 5 years after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury, 
in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services, shall submit a report on the study conducted 
under subparagraph (A) to the Committees on Ways and 
Means, Education and Labor, and Energy and Commerce 
of the House of Representatives and to the Committees on 
Finance and Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the 
Senate. 

(f) Effective Dates. — 

(1) In general. — Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and 
(3), the amendments made by this section shall apply to tax- 
able years beginning after the date of the enactment of this 
Act. 

(2) Community health needs assessment. — The require- 
ments of section 501(r)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9008 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



806 



1986, as added by subsection (a), shall apply to taxable years 
beginning after the date which is 2 years after the date of the 
enactment of this Act. 

(3) Excise tax. — The amendments made by subsection (b) 
shall apply to failures occurring after the date of the enact- 
ment of this Act. 

SEC. 9008. IMPOSITION OF ANNUAL FEE ON BRANDED PRESCRIPTION 
PHARMACEUTICAL MANUFACTURERS AND IMPORTERS. 

(a) Imposition of Fee. — 

(1) In general. — Each covered entity engaged in the busi- 
ness of manufacturing or importing branded prescription drugs 
shall pay to the Secretary of the Treasury not later than the 
annual payment date of each calendar year beginning after 
2010 a fee in an amount determined under subsection (b). [As 
revised by section 1404(a)(1) ofHCERA] 

(2) Annual payment date. — For purposes of this section, 
the term "annual payment date" means with respect to any 
calendar year the date determined by the Secretary, but in no 
event later than September 30 of such calendar year. 

(b) Determination of Fee Amount. — 

(1) In general. — With respect to each covered entity, the 
fee under this section for any calendar year shall be equal to 
an amount that bears the same ratio to the applicable amount 
as— [As revised by section 1404(a)(2)(A) of HCERA] 

(A) the covered entity's branded prescription drug 
sales taken into account during the preceding calendar 
year, bear to 

(B) the aggregate branded prescription drug sales of 
all covered entities taken into account during such pre- 
ceding calendar year. 

(2) Sales taken into account. — For purposes of para- 
graph (1), the branded prescription drug sales taken into ac- 
count during any calendar year with respect to any covered en- 
tity shall be determined in accordance with the following table: 



With respect to a covered entity's aggregate branded pre- ^^kefi accost 
scription drug sales during the calendar year that are: V 

Not more than $5,000,000 percent 

More than $5,000,000 but not more than 10 percent 
$125,000,000. 

More than $125,000,000 but not more than 40 percent 
$225,000,000. 

More than $225,000,000 but not more than 75 percent 
$400,000,000. 

More than $400,000,000 100 percent. 

(3) Secretarial determination. — The Secretary of the 
Treasury shall calculate the amount of each covered entity's 
fee for any calendar year under paragraph (1). In calculating 

June 9, 2010 



807 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9008 



such amount, the Secretary of the Treasury shall determine 
such covered entity's branded prescription drug sales on the 
basis of reports submitted under subsection (g) and through 
the use of any other source of information available to the Sec- 
retary of the Treasury. 

(4) Applicable amount. — [As added by section 
1404(a)(2)(B) of HCERA] For purposes of paragraph (1), the 
applicable amount shall be determined in accordance with the 
following table: 

Calendar year Applicable amount 

2011 $2,500,000,000 

2012 $2,800,000,000 

2013 $2,800,000,000 

2014 $3,000,000,000 

2015 $3,000,000,000 

2016 $3,000,000,000 

2017 $4,000,000,000 

2018 $4,100,000,000 

2019 and thereafter $2,800,000,000. 

(c) Transfer of Fees to Medicare Part B Trust Fund. — 
There is hereby appropriated to the Federal Supplementary Med- 
ical Insurance Trust Fund established under section 1841 of the 
Social Security Act an amount equal to the fees received by the 
Secretary of the Treasury under subsection (a). 

(d) Covered Entity. — 

(1) In general. — For purposes of this section, the term 
"covered entity" means any manufacturer or importer with 
gross receipts from branded prescription drug sales. 

(2) Controlled groups. — 

(A) In general. — For purposes of this subsection, all 
persons treated as a single employer under subsection (a) 
or (b) of section 52 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
or subsection (m) or (o) of section 414 of such Code shall 
be treated as a single covered entity. 

(B) Inclusion of foreign corporations. — For pur- 
poses of subparagraph (A), in applying subsections (a) and 
(b) of section 52 of such Code to this section, section 1563 
of such Code shall be applied without regard to subsection 
(b)(2)(C) thereof. 

(3) Joint and several liability. — If more than one per- 
son is liable for payment of the fee under subsection (a) with 
respect to a single covered entity by reason of the application 
of paragraph (2), all such persons shall be jointly and severally 
liable for payment of such fee. [As added by section 1404(a)(3) 
of HCERA] 

(e) Branded Prescription Drug Sales. — For purposes of this 
section — 

(1) In general. — The term "branded prescription drug 
sales" means sales of branded prescription drugs to any speci- 
fied government program or pursuant to coverage under any 
such program. 

(2) Branded prescription drugs. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9008 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



808 



(A) In general. — The term "branded prescription 
drug" means — 

(i) any prescription drug the application for which 
was submitted under section 505(b) of the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355(b)), or 

(ii) any biological product the license for which 
was submitted under section 351(a) of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262(a)). 

(B) Prescription drug. — For purposes of subpara- 
graph (A)(i), the term "prescription drug" means any drug 
which is subject to section 503(b) of the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 353(b)). 

(3) Exclusion of orphan drug sales. — The term "brand- 
ed prescription drug sales" shall not include sales of any drug 
or biological product with respect to which a credit was allowed 
for any taxable year under section 45C of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986. The preceding sentence shall not apply with re- 
spect to any such drug or biological product after the date on 
which such drug or biological product is approved by the Food 
and Drug Administration for marketing for any indication 
other than the treatment of the rare disease or condition with 
respect to which such credit was allowed. 

(4) Specified government program. — The term "specified 
government program" means — 

(A) the Medicare Part D program under part D of title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act, 

(B) the Medicare Part B program under part B of title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act, 

(C) the Medicaid program under title XIX of the Social 
Security Act, 

(D) any program under which branded prescription 
drugs are procured by the Department of Veterans Affairs, 

(E) any program under which branded prescription 
drugs are procured by the Department of Defense, or 

(F) the TRICARE retail pharmacy program under sec- 
tion 1074g of title 10, United States Code. 

(f) Tax Treatment of Fees. — The fees imposed by this sec- 
tion — 

(1) for purposes of subtitle F of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986, shall be treated as excise taxes with respect to which 
only civil actions for refund under procedures of such subtitle 
shall apply, and 

(2) for purposes of section 275 of such Code, shall be con- 
sidered to be a tax described in section 275(a)(6). 

(g) Reporting Requirement. — Not later than the date deter- 
mined by the Secretary of the Treasury following the end of any 
calendar year, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the 
Secretary of Veterans Affairs, and the Secretary of Defense shall 
report to the Secretary of the Treasury, in such manner as the Sec- 
retary of the Treasury prescribes, the total branded prescription 
drug sales for each covered entity with respect to each specified 
government program under such Secretary's jurisdiction using the 
following methodology: 

June 9, 2010 



809 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9008 



(1) Medicare part d program. — The Secretary of Health 
and Human Services shall report, for each covered entity and 
for each branded prescription drug of the covered entity cov- 
ered by the Medicare Part D program, the product of — 

(A) the per-unit ingredient cost, as reported to the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services by prescription drug 
plans and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans, 
minus any per-unit rebate, discount, or other price conces- 
sion provided by the covered entity, as reported to the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services by the prescription 
drug plans and Medicare Advantage prescription drug 
plans, and 

(B) the number of units of the branded prescription 
drug paid for under the Medicare Part D program. 

(2) Medicare part b program. — The Secretary of Health 
and Human Services shall report, for each covered entity and 
for each branded prescription drug of the covered entity cov- 
ered by the Medicare Part B program under section 1862(a) of 
the Social Security Act, the product of — 

(A) the per-unit average sales price (as defined in sec- 
tion 1847A(c) of the Social Security Act) or the per-unit 
Part B payment rate for a separately paid branded pre- 
scription drug without a reported average sales price, and 

(B) the number of units of the branded prescription 
drug paid for under the Medicare Part B program. 

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services shall estab- 
lish a process for determining the units and the allocated price 
for purposes of this section for those branded prescription 
drugs that are not separately payable or for which National 
Drug Codes are not reported. 

(3) Medicaid program. — The Secretary of Health and 
Human Services shall report, for each covered entity and for 
each branded prescription drug of the covered entity covered 
under the Medicaid program, the product of — 

(A) the per-unit ingredient cost paid to pharmacies by 
States for the branded prescription drug dispensed to Med- 
icaid beneficiaries, minus any per-unit rebate paid by the 
covered entity under section 1927 of the Social Security 
Act and any State supplemental rebate, and 

(B) the number of units of the branded prescription 
drug paid for under the Medicaid program. 

(4) Department of veterans affairs programs. — The 
Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall report, for each covered en- 
tity and for each branded prescription drug of the covered enti- 
ty the total amount paid for each such branded prescription 
drug procured by the Department of Veterans Affairs for its 
beneficiaries. 

(5) Department of defense programs and tricare. — 
The Secretary of Defense shall report, for each covered entity 
and for each branded prescription drug of the covered entity, 
the sum of — 

(A) the total amount paid for each such branded pre- 
scription drug procured by the Department of Defense for 
its beneficiaries, and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9009 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



810 



(B) for each such branded prescription drug dispensed 
under the TRICARE retail pharmacy program, the product 
of— 

(i) the per-unit ingredient cost, minus any per- 
unit rebate paid by the covered entity, and 

(ii) the number of units of the branded prescrip- 
tion drug dispensed under such program. 

(h) Secretary. — For purposes of this section, the term "Sec- 
retary" includes the Secretary's delegate. 

(i) Guidance. — The Secretary of the Treasury shall publish 
guidance necessary to carry out the purposes of this section. 

(j) Effective Date. — [Replaced by section 1404(a)(4) of 
HCERA] This section shall apply to calendar years beginning after 
December 31, 2010. 

(k) Conforming Amendment. — Section 1841(a) of the Social 
Security Act is amended by inserting "or section 9008(c) of the Pa- 
tient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2009" after "this part". 

SEC. 9009. [IMPOSITION OF ANNUAL FEE ON MEDICAL DEVICE MANU- 
FACTURERS AND IMPORTERS] [REPEALED AND RE- 
PLACED]. 

{Repealed by section 1405(d) of HCERA, without redesignation 
of succeeding sections; previously amended by section 10904(a) of 
PPACA. Note section 1405(a)-(c) of HCERA amended the IRC to 
provide an excise tax on medical device manufacturers, as follows:] 

(a) [Sec. 1405(a) of HCERA] In General— Chapter 32 of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended — 

(1) by inserting after subchapter D the following new sub- 
chapter: 

"Subchapter E — Medical Devices 

"Sec. 4191. Medical devices. 
"SEC. 4191. MEDICAL DEVICES. 

"(a) In General. — There is hereby imposed on the sale of any 
taxable medical device by the manufacturer, producer, or importer 
a tax equal to 2.3 percent of the price for which so sold. 

"(b) Taxable Medical Device. — For purposes of this section — 
"(1) In general. — The term 'taxable medical device' means 
any device (as defined in section 201(h) of the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act) intended for humans. 

"(2) Exemptions. — Such term shall not include — 
"(A) eyeglasses, 
"(B) contact lenses, 
"C C) hearing aids, and 

"(D) any other medical device determined by the Sec- 
retary to be of a type which is generally purchased by the 
general public at retail for individual use.", and 

(2) by inserting after the item relating to subchapter D in 
the table of subchapters for such chapter the following new 
item: 

"subchapter e. medical devices". 

(b) [Sec. 1405(b) of HCERA:] Certain Exemptions Not to 
Apply.— 

June 9, 2010 



811 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9010 



(1) Section 4221(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is 
amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: "In 
the case of the tax imposed by section 4191, paragraphs (3), (4), 
(5), and (6) shall not apply.". 

(2) Section 6416(b)(2) of such Code is amended by adding 
at the end the following: "In the case of the tax imposed by sec- 
tion 4191, subparagraphs (B), (C), (D), and (E) shall not 
apply.". 

(c) [Sec. 1405(c) of HCERA:] Effective Date. — The amendments 
made by this section shall apply to sales after December 31, 2012. 

SEC. 9010. IMPOSITION OF ANNUAL FEE ON HEALTH INSURANCE PRO- 
VIDERS. 

(a) Imposition of Fee. — 

(1) In general. — Each covered entity engaged in the busi- 
ness of providing health insurance shall pay to the Secretary 
not later than the annual payment date of each calendar year 
beginning after 2013 a fee in an amount determined under 
subsection (b). [Amended by section 10905(f)(1) and section 
1406(a)(1) of HCERA] 

(2) Annual payment date. — For purposes of this section, 
the term "annual payment date" means with respect to any 
calendar year the date determined by the Secretary, but in no 
event later than September 30 of such calendar year. 

(b) Determination of Fee Amount. — [Replaced by section 
10905(b)} 

(1) In general. — With respect to each covered entity, the 
fee under this section for any calendar year shall be equal to 
an amount that bears the same ratio to the applicable amount 

as — 

(A) the covered entity's net premiums written with re- 
spect to health insurance for any United States health risk 
that are taken into account during the preceding calendar 
year, bears to 

(B) the aggregate net premiums written with respect 
to such health insurance of all covered entities that are 
taken into account during such preceding calendar year. 

(2) Amounts taken into account. — For purposes of para- 
graph (1) — [As revised by section 1406(a)(2) of HCERA] 

(A) In general. — The net premiums written with re- 
spect to health insurance for any United States health risk 
that are taken into account during any calendar year with 
respect to any covered entity shall be determined in ac- 
cordance with the following table: 

With respect to a covered entity's net premiums written n J!l| 1 P e I C !S JiLTL 
during the calendar^ that are: ^ST^M™ 

Not more than $25,000,000 percent 

More than $25,000,000 but not more than 50 percent 
$50,000,000. 

More than $50,000,000 100 percent. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9010 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



812 



(B) Partial exclusion for certain exempt activi- 
ties. — After the application of subparagraph (A), only 50 
percent of the remaining net premiums written with re- 
spect to health insurance for any United States health risk 
that are attributable to the activities (other than activities 
of an unrelated trade or business as defined in section 513 
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) of any covered enti- 
ty qualifying under paragraph (3), (4), (26), or (29) of sec- 
tion 501(c) of such Code and exempt from tax under sec- 
tion 501(a) of such Code shall be taken into account. 
(3) Secretarial determination. — The Secretary shall cal- 
culate the amount of each covered entity's fee for any calendar 
year under paragraph (1). In calculating such amount, the Sec- 
retary shall determine such covered entity's net premiums 
written with respect to any United States health risk on the 
basis of reports submitted by the covered entity under sub- 
section (g) and through the use of any other source of informa- 
tion available to the Secretary. 

(c) Covered Entity. — [As revised by section 1406(a)(3) of 
HCERAi 

(1) In general. — For purposes of this section, the term 
"covered entity" means any entity which provides health insur- 
ance for any United States health risk during the calendar 
year in which the fee under this section is due. 

(2) Exclusion. — Such term does not include — 

(A) any employer to the extent that such employer 
self-insures its employees' health risks, 

(B) any governmental entity, [As revised by section 
10905(f)(2)~\ 

(C) any entity — [Subparagraphs (C) through (E) re- 
vised by section 10905(c) and subsequently rewritten in en- 
tirety, including striking subparagraph (E), by section 
1406(a)(3) of HCERAI 

(i) which is incorporated as a nonprofit corpora- 
tion under a State law, 

(ii) no part of the net earnings of which inures to 
the benefit of any private shareholder or individual, no 
substantial part of the activities of which is carrying 
on propaganda, or otherwise attempting, to influence 
legislation (except as otherwise provided in section 
501(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986), and 
which does not participate in, or intervene in (includ- 
ing the publishing or distributing of statements), any 
political campaign on behalf of (or in opposition to) 
any candidate for public office, and 

(iii) more than 80 percent of the gross revenues of 
which is received from government programs that tar- 
get low-income, elderly, or disabled populations under 
titles XVIII, XIX, and XXI of the Social Security Act, 
and 

(D) any entity which is described in section 501(c)(9) 
of such Code and which is established by an entity (other 
than by an employer or employers) for purposes of pro- 
viding health care benefits. 

June 9, 2010 



813 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9010 



(3) Controlled groups. — 

(A) In general. — For purposes of this subsection, all 
persons treated as a single employer under subsection (a) 
or (b) of section 52 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
or subsection (m) or (o) of section 414 of such Code shall 
be treated as a single covered entity (or employer for pur- 
poses of paragraph (2)). [Note: sentence at end should have 
been inserted at end of this subparagraph] 

(B) Inclusion of foreign corporations. — For pur- 
poses of subparagraph (A), in applying subsections (a) and 
(b) of section 52 of such Code to this section, section 1563 
of such Code shall be applied without regard to subsection 
(b)(2)(C) thereof. 

If any entity described in [executed to reflect probable intent of 
amendment made by section 1406(a)(3)(C) of HCERA] subpara- 
graph (C) or (D) of paragraph (2) is treated as a covered entity 
by reason of the application of the preceding sentence, the net 
premiums written with respect to health insurance for any 
United States health risk of such entity shall not be taken into 
account for purposes of this section. [Previous sentence added 
by section 10905(f)(3) "at the end" of this paragraph; likely 
placement should have been at end of subparagraph (A).] 

(4) Joint and several liability. — [As added by section 
1406(a)(3)(D) of HCERA] If more than one person is liable for 
payment of the fee under subsection (a) with respect to a single 
covered entity by reason of the application of paragraph (3), all 
such persons shall be jointly and severally liable for payment 
of such fee. 

(d) United States Health Risk. — For purposes of this section, 
the term "United States health risk" means the health risk of any 
individual who is — 

(1) a United States citizen, 

(2) a resident of the United States (within the meaning of 
section 7701(b)(1)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986), or 

(3) located in the United States, with respect to the period 
such individual is so located. 

(e) Applicable Amount. — [Replaced by section 10905(b) and 
subsequently revised by section 1306(a)(4) of HCERA] For purposes 
of subsection (b)(1) — 

(1) Years before 2019. — In the case of calendar years be- 
ginning before 2019, the applicable amount shall be deter- 
mined in accordance with the following table: 

Calendar year Applicable amount 

2014 $8,000,000,000 

2015 $11,300,000,000 

2016 $11,300,000,000 

2017 $13,900,000,000 

2018 $14,300,000,000. 

(2) Years after 2018. — In the case of any calendar year be- 
ginning after 2018, the applicable amount shall be the applica- 
ble amount for the preceding calendar year increased by the 
rate of premium growth (within the meaning of section 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9010 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



814 



36B(b)(3)(A)(ii) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) for such 
preceding calendar year. 

(f) Tax Treatment of Fees. — The fees imposed by this sec- 
tion — 

(1) for purposes of subtitle F of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986, shall be treated as excise taxes with respect to which 
only civil actions for refund under procedures of such subtitle 
shall apply, and 

(2) for purposes of section 275 of such Code shall be consid- 
ered to be a tax described in section 275(a)(6). 

(g) Reporting Requirement. — 

(1) In general. — Not later than the date determined by 
the Secretary following the end of any calendar year, each cov- 
ered entity shall report to the Secretary, in such manner as the 
Secretary prescribes, the covered entity's net premiums written 
with respect to health insurance for any United States health 
risk for such calendar year. [As revised by section 10904(f)(4)~\ 

(2) Penalty for failure to report. — 

(A) In general. — In the case of any failure to make 
a report containing the information required by paragraph 
(1) on the date prescribed therefor (determined with regard 
to any extension of time for filing), unless it is shown that 
such failure is due to reasonable cause, there shall be paid 
by the covered entity failing to file such report, an amount 
equal to — 

(i) $10,000, plus 

(ii) the lesser of — 

(I) an amount equal to $1,000, multiplied by 
the number of days during which such failure con- 
tinues, or 

(II) the amount of the fee imposed by this sec- 
tion for which such report was required. 

(B) Treatment of penalty. — The penalty imposed 
under subparagraph (A) — 

(i) shall be treated as a penalty for purposes of 
subtitle F of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 

(ii) shall be paid on notice and demand by the Sec- 
retary and in the same manner as tax under such 
Code, and 

(iii) with respect to which only civil actions for re- 
fund under procedures of such subtitle F shall apply. 

(3) Accuracy-related penalty. — [As added by section 
1406(a)(5) of HCERA] 

(A) In general. — In the case of any understatement of 
a covered entity's net premiums written with respect to 
health insurance for any United States health risk for any 
calendar year, there shall be paid by the covered entity 
making such understatement, an amount equal to the ex- 
cess of — 

(i) the amount of the covered entity's fee under 
this section for the calendar year the Secretary deter- 
mines should have been paid in the absence of any 
such understatement, over 

June 9, 2010 



815 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9011 



(ii) the amount of such fee the Secretary deter- 
mined based on such understatement. 

(B) Understatement. — For purposes of this para- 
graph, an understatement of a covered entity's net pre- 
miums written with respect to health insurance for any 
United States health risk for any calendar year is the dif- 
ference between the amount of such net premiums written 
as reported on the return filed by the covered entity under 
paragraph (1) and the amount of such net premiums writ- 
ten that should have been reported on such return. 

(C) Treatment of penalty. — The penalty imposed 
under subparagraph (A) shall be subject to the provisions 
of subtitle F of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 that 
apply to assessable penalties imposed under chapter 68 of 
such Code. 

(4) Treatment of information. — [As added by section 
1406(a)(5) of HCERA] Section 6103 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 shall not apply to any information reported under 
this subsection. 

(h) Additional Definitions. — For purposes of this section — 

(1) Secretary. — The term "Secretary" means the Sec- 
retary of the Treasury or the Secretary's delegate. 

(2) United states. — The term "United States" means the 
several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico, and the possessions of the United States. 

(3) Health insurance. — [Replaced by section 10905(d)] 
The term "health insurance" shall not include — 

(A) any insurance coverage described in paragraph 
(1)(A) or (3) of section 9832(c) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986, 

(B) any insurance for long-term care, or 

(C) any medicare supplemental health insurance (as 
defined in section 1882(g)(1) of the Social Security Act). 

(i) Guidance. — The Secretary shall publish guidance necessary 
to carry out the purposes of this section and shall prescribe such 
regulations as are necessary or appropriate to prevent avoidance of 
the purposes of this section, including inappropriate actions taken 
to qualify as an exempt entity under subsection (c)(2). [As revised 
by section 10905(e)] 

(j) Effective Date. — [Replaced by section 1406(a)(6) of 
HCERA; previous amendment by section 19095(f)(5)(A) was 
unexecutable] This section shall apply to calendar years beginning 
after December 31, 2013. 

SEC. 9011. STUDY AND REPORT OF EFFECT ON VETERANS HEALTH 
CARE. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall con- 
duct a study on the effect (if any) of the provisions of sections 9008, 
9009, and 9010 on— 

(1) the cost of medical care provided to veterans, and 

(2) veterans' access to medical devices and branded pre- 
scription drugs. 

(b) Report. — The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall report the 
results of the study under subsection (a) to the Committee on Ways 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9012 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



816 



and Means of the House of Representatives and to the Committee 
on Finance of the Senate not later than December 31, 2012. 

SEC. 9012. ELIMINATION OF DEDUCTION FOR EXPENSES ALLOCABLE 
TO MEDICARE PART D SUBSIDY. 

(a) In General. — Section 139A of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986 is amended by striking the second sentence. 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by this section 
shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2012. 

SEC. 9013. MODIFICATION OF ITEMIZED DEDUCTION FOR MEDICAL 
EXPENSES. 

(a) In General. — Subsection (a) of section 213 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking "7.5 percent" and in- 
serting "10 percent". 

(b) Temporary Waiver of Increase for Certain Seniors. — 
Section 213 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by 
adding at the end the following new subsection: 

"(f) Special Rule for 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016.— In the 
case of any taxable year beginning after December 31, 2012, and 
ending before January 1, 2017, subsection (a) shall be applied with 
respect to a taxpayer by substituting '7.5 percent' for '10 percent' 
if such taxpayer or such taxpayer's spouse has attained age 65 be- 
fore the close of such taxable year.". 

(c) Conforming Amendment. — Section 56(b)(1)(B) of the Inter- 
nal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking "by substituting 
'10 percent' for '7.5 percent'" and inserting "without regard to sub- 
section (f) of such section". 

(d) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2012. 

SEC. 9014. LIMITATION ON EXCESSrVE REMUNERATION PAID BY CER- 
TAIN HEALTH INSURANCE PROVIDERS. 

(a) In General. — Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new sub- 
paragraph: 

"(6) Special rule for application to certain health in- 
surance PROVIDERS. — 

"(A) In general. — No deduction shall be allowed 
under this chapter — 

"(i) in the case of applicable individual remunera- 
tion which is for any disqualified taxable year begin- 
ning after December 31, 2012, and which is attrib- 
utable to services performed by an applicable indi- 
vidual during such taxable year, to the extent that the 
amount of such remuneration exceeds $500,000, or 

"(ii) in the case of deferred deduction remunera- 
tion for any taxable year beginning after December 31, 
2012, which is attributable to services performed by 
an applicable individual during any disqualified tax- 
able year beginning after December 31, 2009, to the 
extent that the amount of such remuneration exceeds 
$500,000 reduced (but not below zero) by the sum of — 
"(I) the applicable individual remuneration for 
such disqualified taxable year, plus 



817 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9014 



"(II) the portion of the deferred deduction re- 
muneration for such services which was taken 
into account under this clause in a preceding tax- 
able year (or which would have been taken into 
account under this clause in a preceding taxable 
year if this clause were applied by substituting 
'December 31, 2009' for 'December 31, 2012' in the 
matter preceding subclause (I)). 
"(B) Disqualified taxable year. — For purposes of 
this paragraph, the term 'disqualified taxable year' means, 
with respect to any employer, any taxable year for which 
such employer is a covered health insurance provider. 

"(C) Covered health insurance provider. — For pur- 
poses of this paragraph — 

"(i) In general. — The term 'covered health insur- 
ance provider' means — 

"(I) with respect to taxable years beginning 
after December 31, 2009, and before January 1, 
2013, any employer which is a health insurance 
issuer (as defined in section 9832(b)(2)) and which 
receives premiums from providing health insur- 
ance coverage (as defined in section 9832(b)(1)), 
and 

"(II) with respect to taxable years beginning 
after December 31, 2012, any employer which is a 
health insurance issuer (as defined in section 
9832(b)(2)) and with respect to which not less 
than 25 percent of the gross premiums received 
from providing health insurance coverage (as de- 
fined in section 9832(b)(1)) is from minimum es- 
sential coverage (as defined in section 5000A(f)). 
"(ii) Aggregation rules. — Two or more persons 
who are treated as a single employer under subsection 
(b), (c), (m), or (o) of section 414 shall be treated as a 
single employer, except that in applying section 
1563(a) for purposes of any such subsection, para- 
graphs (2) and (3) thereof shall be disregarded. 
"(D) Applicable individual remuneration. — For 
purposes of this paragraph, the term 'applicable individual 
remuneration' means, with respect to any applicable indi- 
vidual for any disqualified taxable year, the aggregate 
amount allowable as a deduction under this chapter for 
such taxable year (determined without regard to this sub- 
section) for remuneration (as defined in paragraph (4) 
without regard to subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D) thereof) 
for services performed by such individual (whether or not 
during the taxable year). Such term shall not include any 
deferred deduction remuneration with respect to services 
performed during the disqualified taxable year. 

"(E) Deferred deduction remuneration. — For pur- 
poses of this paragraph, the term 'deferred deduction re- 
muneration' means remuneration which would be applica- 
ble individual remuneration for services performed in a 
disqualified taxable year but for the fact that the deduc- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9015 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



818 



tion under this chapter (determined without regard to this 
paragraph) for such remuneration is allowable in a subse- 
quent taxable year. 

"(F) Applicable individual. — For purposes of this 
paragraph, the term 'applicable individual' means, with re- 
spect to any covered health insurance provider for any dis- 
qualified taxable year, any individual — 

"(i) who is an officer, director, or employee in such 

taxable year, or 

"(ii) who provides services for or on behalf of such 

covered health insurance provider during such taxable 

year. 

"(G) Coordination. — Rules similar to the rules of sub- 
paragraphs (F) and (G) of paragraph (4) shall apply for 
purposes of this paragraph. 

"(H) Regulatory authority. — The Secretary may 
prescribe such guidance, rules, or regulations as are nec- 
essary to carry out the purposes of this paragraph.", 
(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by this section 
shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2009, 
with respect to services performed after such date. 

SEC. 9015. ADDITIONAL HOSPITAL INSURANCE TAX ON HIGH-INCOME 
TAXPAYERS. 

(a) FICA— 

(1) In general. — Section 3101(b) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 is amended — 

(A) by striking "In addition" and inserting the fol- 
lowing: 

"(1) In general. — In addition", 

(B) by striking "the following percentages of the" and 
inserting "1.45 percent of the", 

(C) by striking "(as defined in section 3121(b)) — " and 
all that follows and inserting "(as defined in section 
3121(b)).", and 

(D) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 
[As revised by section 10906(a)] 

"(2) Additional tax. — In addition to the tax imposed by 
paragraph (1) and the preceding subsection, there is hereby 
imposed on every taxpayer (other than a corporation, estate, or 
trust) a tax equal to 0.9 percent of wages which are received 
with respect to employment (as defined in section 3121(b)) dur- 
ing any taxable year beginning after December 31, 2012, and 
which are in excess of — [As revised by section 1402(b)(1)(A) of 
HCERA] 

"(A) in the case of a joint return, $250,000, 
"(B) in the case of a married taxpayer (as defined in 
section 7703) filing a separate return, V2 of the dollar 
amount determined under subparagraph (A), and 
"(C) in any other case, $200,000.". 

(2) Collection of tax. — Section 3102 of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new subsection: 

"(f) Special Rules for Additional Tax. — 

June 9, 2010 



819 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9015 



"(1) In general. — In the case of any tax imposed by sec- 
tion 3101(b)(2), subsection (a) shall only apply to the extent to 
which the taxpayer receives wages from the employer in excess 
of $200,000, and the employer may disregard the amount of 
wages received by such taxpayer's spouse. 

"(2) Collection of amounts not withheld. — To the ex- 
tent that the amount of any tax imposed by section 3101(b)(2) 
is not collected by the employer, such tax shall be paid by the 
employee. 

"(3) Tax paid by recipient. — If an employer, in violation 
of this chapter, fails to deduct and withhold the tax imposed 
by section 3101(b)(2) and thereafter the tax is paid by the em- 
ployee, the tax so required to be deducted and withheld shall 
not be collected from the employer, but this paragraph shall in 
no case relieve the employer from liability for any penalties or 
additions to tax otherwise applicable in respect of such failure 
to deduct and withhold.", 
(b) SECA— 

(1) In general. — Section 1401(b) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 is amended — 

(A) by striking "In addition" and inserting the fol- 
lowing: 

"(1) In general. — In addition", and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 
"(2) Additional tax. — [As revised by section 10906(b)~\ 

"(A) In general. — In addition to the tax imposed by 
paragraph (1) and the preceding subsection, there is here- 
by imposed on every taxpayer (other than a corporation, 
estate, or trust) for each taxable year beginning after De- 
cember 31, 2012, a tax equal to 0.9 percent of the self-em- 
ployment income for such taxable year which is in excess 
of— [As revised by section 1402(b)(1)(B) ofHCERA} 
"(i) in the case of a joint return, $250,000, 
"(ii) in the case of a married taxpayer (as defined 
in section 7703) filing a separate return, V2 of the dol- 
lar amount determined under clause (i), and 

"(hi) in any other case, $200,000. 
"(B) Coordination with fica. — [As revised by section 
1402(b)(1)(B) of HCEBA\ The amounts under clause (i), 
(ii), or (iii) (whichever is applicable) of subparagraph (A) 
shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount of 
wages taken into account in determining the tax imposed 
under section 3121(b)(2) with respect to the taxpayer.". 

(2) NO DEDUCTION FOR ADDITIONAL TAX. — 

(A) In general. — Section 164(f) of such Code is 
amended by inserting "(other than the taxes imposed by 
section 1401(b)(2))" after "section 1401)". 

(B) Deduction for net earnings from self-employ- 
ment. — Subparagraph (B) of section 1402(a)(12) is amend- 
ed by inserting "(determined without regard to the rate 
imposed under paragraph (2) of section 1401(b))" after "for 
such year". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9016 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



820 



(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply with respect to remuneration received, and taxable 
years beginning, after December 31, 2012. 

SEC. 9016. MODIFICATION OF SECTION 833 TREATMENT OF CERTAIN 
HEALTH ORGANIZATIONS. 

(a) In General. — Subsection (c) of section 833 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new paragraph: 

"(5) NONAPPLICATION OF SECTION IN CASE OF LOW MEDICAL 

loss ratio. — Notwithstanding the preceding paragraphs, this 
section shall not apply to any organization unless such organi- 
zation's percentage of total premium revenue expended on re- 
imbursement for clinical services provided to enrollees under 
its policies during such taxable year (as reported under section 
2718 of the Public Health Service Act) is not less than 85 per- 
cent.". 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by this section 
shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2009. 

[SEC. 9017. [EXCISE TAX ON ELECTIVE COSMETIC MEDICAL PROCE- 
DURES] [NULLIFIED] .] 

[This section, and the amendments made by this section, are 
null, void, and of no effect under section 10907(a), but was not for- 
mally repealed; section 10907(b), which provides for an excise tax on 
indoor tanning services, effectively substitutes for this section.] 

[(a) In General. — Subtitle D of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986, as amended by this Act, is amended by adding at the end the 
following new chapter:] 

["CHAPTER 49— ELECTIVE COSMETIC MEDICAL 
PROCEDURES] 

"Sec. 5000B. Imposition of tax on elective cosmetic medical procedures. 

["SEC. 5000B. IMPOSITION OF TAX ON ELECTP/E COSMETIC MEDICAL 
PROCEDURES.] 

["(a) In General. — There is hereby imposed on any cosmetic 
surgery and medical procedure a tax equal to 5 percent of the 
amount paid for such procedure (determined without regard to this 
section), whether paid by insurance or otherwise.] 

["(b) Cosmetic Surgery and Medical Procedure. — For pur- 
poses of this section, the term 'cosmetic surgery and medical proce- 
dure' means any cosmetic surgery (as defined in section 
213(d)(9)(B)) or other similar procedure which — ] 

["(1) is performed by a licensed medical professional, and] 
["(2) is not necessary to ameliorate a deformity arising 
from, or directly related to, a congenital abnormality, a per- 
sonal injury resulting from an accident or trauma, or dis- 
figuring disease.] 
["(c) Payment of Tax. — ] 

["(1) In general. — The tax imposed by this section shall 
be paid by the individual on whom the procedure is per- 
formed.] 

["(2) Collection. — Every person receiving a payment for 
procedures on which a tax is imposed under subsection (a) 
shall collect the amount of the tax from the individual on 

June 9, 2010 



821 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9Q21M39D IRC 



whom the procedure is performed and remit such tax quarterly 
to the Secretary at such time and in such manner as provided 
by the Secretary.] 

["(3) Secondary liability. — Where any tax imposed by 
subsection (a) is not paid at the time payments for cosmetic 
surgery and medical procedures are made, then to the extent 
that such tax is not collected, such tax shall be paid by the per- 
son who performs the procedure.".] 

[(b) Clerical Amendment. — The table of chapters for subtitle 
D of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended by this Act, 
is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 48 the 
following new item:] 

"Chapter 49 — Elective Cosmetic Medical Procedures". 

[(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to procedures performed on or after January 1, 2010.] 

Subtitle B — Other Provisions 

SEC. 9021. EXCLUSION OF HEALTH BENEFITS PROVIDED BY INDIAN 
TRIBAL GOVERNMENTS. 

(a) In General. — Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after sec- 
tion 139C the following new section: 

"SEC. 139D. INDIAN HEALTH CARE BENEFITS. 

"(a) General Rule. — Except as otherwise provided in this sec- 
tion, gross income does not include the value of any qualified In- 
dian health care benefit. 

"(b) Qualified Indian Health Care Benefit. — For purposes 
of this section, the term 'qualified Indian health care benefit' 
means — 

"(1) any health service or benefit provided or purchased, 
directly or indirectly, by the Indian Health Service through a 
grant to or a contract or compact with an Indian tribe or tribal 
organization, or through a third-party program funded by the 
Indian Health Service, 

"(2) medical care provided or purchased by, or amounts to 
reimburse for such medical care provided by, an Indian tribe 
or tribal organization for, or to, a member of an Indian tribe, 
including a spouse or dependent of such a member, 

"(3) coverage under accident or health insurance (or an ar- 
rangement having the effect of accident or health insurance), 
or an accident or health plan, provided by an Indian tribe or 
tribal organization for medical care to a member of an Indian 
tribe, include a spouse or dependent of such a member, and 

"(4) any other medical care provided by an Indian tribe or 
tribal organization that supplements, replaces, or substitutes 
for a program or service relating to medical care provided by 
the Federal government to Indian tribes or members of such a 
tribe. 

"(c) Definitions. — For purposes of this section — 

"(1) Indian tribe. — The term 'Indian tribe' has the mean- 
ing given such term by section 45A(c)(6). 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9021 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



822 



"(2) Tribal organization. — The term 'tribal organization' 
has the meaning given such term by section 4(1) of the Indian 
Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act. 

"(3) Medical care. — The term 'medical care' has the same 
meaning as when used in section 213. 

"(4) Accident or health insurance; accident or 
health plan. — The terms 'accident or health insurance' and 
'accident or health plan' have the same meaning as when used 
in section 105. 

"(5) Dependent. — The term 'dependent' has the meaning 
given such term by section 152, determined without regard to 
subsections (b)(1), (b)(2), and (d)(1)(B) thereof. 
"(d) Denial of Double Benefit. — Subsection (a) shall not 
apply to the amount of any qualified Indian health care benefit 
which is not includible in gross income of the beneficiary of such 
benefit under any other provision of this chapter, or to the amount 
of any such benefit for which a deduction is allowed to such bene- 
ficiary under any other provision of this chapter.". 

(b) Clerical Amendment. — The table of sections for part III of 
subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is 
amended by inserting after the item relating to section 139C the 
following new item: 

"Sec. 139D. Indian health care benefits.". 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to benefits and coverage provided after the date of the 
enactment of this Act. 

(d) No Inference. — Nothing in the amendments made by this 
section shall be construed to create an inference with respect to the 
exclusion from gross income of — 

(1) benefits provided by an Indian tribe or tribal organiza- 
tion that are not within the scope of this section, and 

(2) benefits provided prior to the date of the enactment of 
this Act. 

SEC. 9022. ESTABLISHMENT OF SIMPLE CAFETERIA PLANS FOR SMALL 
BUSINESSES. 

(a) In General. — Section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 (relating to cafeteria plans), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by redesignating subsections (j) and (k) as subsections (k) 
and (1), respectively, and by inserting after subsection (i) the fol- 
lowing new subsection: 

"(j) Simple Cafeteria Plans for Small Businesses. — 

"(1) In general. — An eligible employer maintaining a sim- 
ple cafeteria plan with respect to which the requirements of 
this subsection are met for any year shall be treated as meet- 
ing any applicable nondiscrimination requirement during such 
year. 

"(2) Simple cafeteria plan. — For purposes of this sub- 
section, the term 'simple cafeteria plan' means a cafeteria 
plan — 

"(A) which is established and maintained by an eligi- 
ble employer, and 

June 9, 2010 



823 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9011 



"(B) with respect to which the contribution require- 
ments of paragraph (3), and the eligibility and participa- 
tion requirements of paragraph (4), are met. 
"(3) Contribution requirements. — 

"(A) In general. — The requirements of this paragraph 
are met if, under the plan the employer is required, with- 
out regard to whether a qualified employee makes any sal- 
ary reduction contribution, to make a contribution to pro- 
vide qualified benefits under the plan on behalf of each 
qualified employee in an amount equal to — 

"(i) a uniform percentage (not less than 2 percent) 

of the employee's compensation for the plan year, or 
"(ii) an amount which is not less than the lesser 

of— 

"(I) 6 percent of the employee's compensation 
for the plan year, or 

"(II) twice the amount of the salary reduction 
contributions of each qualified employee. 
"(B) Matching contributions on behalf of highly 
compensated and key employees. — The requirements of 
subparagraph (A)(ii) shall not be treated as met if, under 
the plan, the rate of contributions with respect to any sal- 
ary reduction contribution of a highly compensated or key 
employee at any rate of contribution is greater than that 
with respect to an employee who is not a highly com- 
pensated or key employee. 

"(C) Additional contributions. — Subject to subpara- 
graph (B), nothing in this paragraph shall be treated as 
prohibiting an employer from making contributions to pro- 
vide qualified benefits under the plan in addition to con- 
tributions required under subparagraph (A). 

"(D) Definitions. — For purposes of this paragraph — 

"(i) Salary reduction contribution. — The term 
'salary reduction contribution' means, with respect to 
a cafeteria plan, any amount which is contributed to 
the plan at the election of the employee and which is 
not includible in gross income by reason of this sec- 
tion. 

"(ii) Qualified employee. — The term 'qualified 
employee' means, with respect to a cafeteria plan, any 
employee who is not a highly compensated or key em- 
ployee and who is eligible to participate in the plan. 

"(hi) Highly compensated employee. — The term 
'highly compensated employee' has the meaning given 
such term by section 414(q). 

"(iv) Key employee. — The term 'key employee' 
has the meaning given such term by section 416(i). 
"(4) Minimum eligibility and participation require- 
ments. — 

"(A) In general. — The requirements of this paragraph 
shall be treated as met with respect to any year if, under 
the plan — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9011 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



824 



"(i) all employees who had at least 1,000 hours of 
service for the preceding plan year are eligible to par- 
ticipate, and 

"(ii) each employee eligible to participate in the 
plan may, subject to terms and conditions applicable 
to all participants, elect any benefit available under 
the plan. 

"(B) Certain employees may be excluded. — For pur- 
poses of subparagraph (A)(i), an employer may elect to ex- 
clude under the plan employees — 

"(i) who have not attained the age of 21 before the 
close of a plan year, 

"(ii) who have less than 1 year of service with the 
employer as of any day during the plan year, 

"(hi) who are covered under an agreement which 
the Secretary of Labor finds to be a collective bar- 
gaining agreement if there is evidence that the bene- 
fits covered under the cafeteria plan were the subject 
of good faith bargaining between employee representa- 
tives and the employer, or 

"(iv) who are described in section 410(b)(3)(C) (re- 
lating to nonresident aliens working outside the 
United States). 
A plan may provide a shorter period of service or younger 
age for purposes of clause (i) or (ii). 

"(5) Eligible employer. — For purposes of this sub- 
section — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'eligible employer' means, 
with respect to any year, any employer if such employer 
employed an average of 100 or fewer employees on busi- 
ness days during either of the 2 preceding years. For pur- 
poses of this subparagraph, a year may only be taken into 
account if the employer was in existence throughout the 
year. 

"(B) Employers not in existence during preceding 
YEAR. — If an employer was not in existence throughout the 
preceding year, the determination under subparagraph (A) 
shall be based on the average number of employees that 
it is reasonably expected such employer will employ on 
business days in the current year. 

"(C) Growing employers retain treatment as 

SMALL EMPLOYER. — 

"(i) In general. — If— 

"(I) an employer was an eligible employer for 
any year (a 'qualified year'), and 

"(II) such employer establishes a simple cafe- 
teria plan for its employees for such year, 
then, notwithstanding the fact the employer fails to 
meet the requirements of subparagraph (A) for any 
subsequent year, such employer shall be treated as an 
eligible employer for such subsequent year with re- 
spect to employees (whether or not employees during 
a qualified year) of any trade or business which was 
covered by the plan during any qualified year. 

June 9, 2010 



825 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9023X48D IRC 



"(ii) Exception. — This subparagraph shall cease 
to apply if the employer employs an average of 200 or 
more employees on business days during any year pre- 
ceding any such subsequent year. 
"(D) Special rules. — 

"(i) Predecessors. — Any reference in this para- 
graph to an employer shall include a reference to any 
predecessor of such employer. 

"(ii) Aggregation rules.— All persons treated as 
a single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 
52, or subsection (n) or (o) of section 414, shall be 
treated as one person. 
"(6) Applicable nondiscrimination requirement. — For 
purposes of this subsection, the term 'applicable nondiscrimina- 
tion requirement' means any requirement under subsection (b) 
of this section, section 79(d), section 105(h), or paragraph (2), 
(3), (4), or (8) of section 129(d). 

"(7) Compensation. — The term 'compensation' has the 
meaning given such term by section 414(s).". 
(b) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to years beginning after December 31, 2010. 

SEC. 9023. QUALIFYING THERAPEUTIC DISCOVERY PROJECT CREDIT. 

(a) In General. — Subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of 
chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by in- 
serting after section 48C the following new section: 

"SEC. 48D. QUALIFYING THERAPEUTIC DISCOVERY PROJECT CREDIT. 

"(a) In General. — For purposes of section 46, the qualifying 
therapeutic discovery project credit for any taxable year is an 
amount equal to 50 percent of the qualified investment for such 
taxable year with respect to any qualifying therapeutic discovery 
project of an eligible taxpayer. 
"(b) Qualified Investment. — 

"(1) In general. — For purposes of subsection (a), the 
qualified investment for any taxable year is the aggregate 
amount of the costs paid or incurred in such taxable year for 
expenses necessary for and directly related to the conduct of a 
qualifying therapeutic discovery project. 

"(2) Limitation. — The amount which is treated as quali- 
fied investment for all taxable years with respect to any quali- 
fying therapeutic discovery project shall not exceed the amount 
certified by the Secretary as eligible for the credit under this 
section. 

"(3) Exclusions. — The qualified investment for any tax- 
able year with respect to any qualifying therapeutic discovery 
project shall not take into account any cost — 

"(A) for remuneration for an employee described in 
section 162(m)(3), 

"(B) for interest expenses, 
"(C) for facility maintenance expenses, 
"(D) which is identified as a service cost under section 
1.263A-l(e)(4) of title 26, Code of Federal Regulations, or 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9023X48D IRC 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



826 



"(E) for any other expense as determined by the Sec- 
retary as appropriate to carry out the purposes of this sec- 
tion. 

"(4) Certain progress expenditure rules made applica- 
ble. — In the case of costs described in paragraph (1) that are 
paid for property of a character subject to an allowance for de- 
preciation, rules similar to the rules of subsections (c)(4) and 
(d) of section 46 (as in effect on the day before the date of the 
enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990) shall 
apply for purposes of this section. 

"(5) Application of subsection. — An investment shall be 
considered a qualified investment under this subsection only if 
such investment is made in a taxable year beginning in 2009 
or 2010. 

"(c) Definitions. — 

"(1) Qualifying therapeutic discovery project. — The 

term 'qualifying therapeutic discovery project' means a project 

which is designed — 

"(A) to treat or prevent diseases or conditions by con- 
ducting pre-clinical activities, clinical trials, and clinical 
studies, or carrying out research protocols, for the purpose 
of securing approval of a product under section 505(b) of 
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or section 351(a) 
of the Public Health Service Act, 

"(B) to diagnose diseases or conditions or to determine 
molecular factors related to diseases or conditions by de- 
veloping molecular diagnostics to guide therapeutic deci- 
sions, or 

"(C) to develop a product, process, or technology to fur- 
ther the delivery or administration of therapeutics. 
"(2) Eligible taxpayer. — 

"(A) In general. — The term 'eligible taxpayer' means 
a taxpayer which employs not more than 250 employees in 
all businesses of the taxpayer at the time of the submis- 
sion of the application under subsection (d)(2). 

"(B) Aggregation rules. — All persons treated as a 
single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52, 
or subsection (m) or (o) of section 414, shall be so treated 
for purposes of this paragraph. 

"(3) Facility maintenance expenses. — The term 'facility 
maintenance expenses' means costs paid or incurred to main- 
tain a facility, including — 

"(A) mortgage or rent payments, 
"(B) insurance payments, 
"(C) utility and maintenance costs, and 
"(D) costs of employment of maintenance personnel. 
"(d) Qualifying Therapeutic Discovery Project Pro- 
gram. — 

"(1) Establishment. — 

"(A) In general. — Not later than 60 days after the 
date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary, in con- 
sultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices, shall establish a qualifying therapeutic discovery 
project program to consider and award certifications for 

June 9, 2010 



827 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9023X48D IRC 



qualified investments eligible for credits under this section 
to qualifying therapeutic discovery project sponsors. 

"(B) Limitation. — The total amount of credits that 
may be allocated under the program shall not exceed 
$1,000,000,000 for the 2-year period beginning with 2009. 
"(2) Certification. — 

"(A) Application period. — Each applicant for certifi- 
cation under this paragraph shall submit an application 
containing such information as the Secretary may require 
during the period beginning on the date the Secretary es- 
tablishes the program under paragraph (1). 

"(B) Time for review of applications. — The Sec- 
retary shall take action to approve or deny any application 
under subparagraph (A) within 30 days of the submission 
of such application. 

"(C) Multi-year applications. — An application for 
certification under subparagraph (A) may include a re- 
quest for an allocation of credits for more than 1 of the 
years described in paragraph (1)(B). 

"(3) Selection criteria. — In determining the qualifying 
therapeutic discovery projects with respect to which qualified 
investments may be certified under this section, the Sec- 
retary — 

"(A) shall take into consideration only those projects 
that show reasonable potential — 

"(i) to result in new therapies — 

"(I) to treat areas of unmet medical need, or 
"(II) to prevent, detect, or treat chronic or 
acute diseases and conditions, 
"(ii) to reduce long-term health care costs in the 
United States, or 

"(hi) to significantly advance the goal of curing 
cancer within the 30-year period beginning on the date 
the Secretary establishes the program under para- 
graph (1), and 

"(B) shall take into consideration which projects have 
the greatest potential — 

"(i) to create and sustain (directly or indirectly) 
high quality, high-paying jobs in the United States, 
and 

"(ii) to advance United States competitiveness in 
the fields of life, biological, and medical sciences. 

"(4) Disclosure of allocations. — The Secretary shall, 
upon making a certification under this subsection, publicly dis- 
close the identity of the applicant and the amount of the credit 
with respect to such applicant. 
"(e) Special Rules. — 

"(1) Basis adjustment. — For purposes of this subtitle, if a 
credit is allowed under this section for an expenditure related 
to property of a character subject to an allowance for deprecia- 
tion, the basis of such property shall be reduced by the amount 
of such credit. 

"(2) Denial of double benefit. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9023 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



828 



"(A) Bonus depreciation. — A credit shall not be al- 
lowed under this section for any investment for which 
bonus depreciation is allowed under section 168(k), 
1400L(b)(l), or 1400N(d)(l). 

"(B) Deductions. — No deduction under this subtitle 
shall be allowed for the portion of the expenses otherwise 
allowable as a deduction taken into account in determining 
the credit under this section for the taxable year which is 
equal to the amount of the credit determined for such tax- 
able year under subsection (a) attributable to such portion. 
This subparagraph shall not apply to expenses related to 
property of a character subject to an allowance for depre- 
ciation the basis of which is reduced under paragraph (1), 
or which are described in section 280C(g). 
"(C) Credit for research activities. — 

"(i) In general. — Except as provided in clause (ii), 
any expenses taken into account under this section for 
a taxable year shall not be taken into account for pur- 
poses of determining the credit allowable under sec- 
tion 41 or 45C for such taxable year. 

"(ii) Expenses included in determining base pe- 
riod RESEARCH EXPENSES. — Any expenses for any tax- 
able year which are qualified research expenses (with- 
in the meaning of section 41(b)) shall be taken into ac- 
count in determining base period research expenses 
for purposes of applying section 41 to subsequent tax- 
able years. 

"(f) Coordination With Department of Treasury Grants. — 
In the case of any investment with respect to which the Secretary 
makes a grant under section 9023(e) of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act of 2009— 

"(1) Denial of credit. — No credit shall be determined 
under this section with respect to such investment for the tax- 
able year in which such grant is made or any subsequent tax- 
able year. 

"(2) Recapture of credits for progress expenditures 
made before grant. — If a credit was determined under this 
section with respect to such investment for any taxable year 
ending before such grant is made — 

"(A) the tax imposed under subtitle A on the taxpayer 

for the taxable year in which such grant is made shall be 

increased by so much of such credit as was allowed under 

section 38, 

"(B) the general business carryforwards under section 
39 shall be adjusted so as to recapture the portion of such 
credit which was not so allowed, and 

"(C) the amount of such grant shall be determined 
without regard to any reduction in the basis of any prop- 
erty of a character subject to an allowance for depreciation 
by reason of such credit. 

"(3) Treatment of grants. — Any such grant shall not be 
includible in the gross income of the taxpayer.", 
(b) Inclusion as Part of Investment Credit. — Section 46 of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended — 

June 9, 2010 



829 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9023 



(1) by adding a comma at the end of paragraph (2), 

(2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and 
inserting ", and", and 

(3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 
"(6) the qualifying therapeutic discovery project credit.". 

(c) Conforming Amendments. — 

(1) Section 49(a)(1)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 is amended — 

(A) by striking "and" at the end of clause (iv), 

(B) by striking the period at the end of clause (v) and 
inserting ", and", and 

(C) by adding at the end the following new clause: 
"(vi) the basis of any property to which paragraph 

(1) of section 48D(e) applies which is part of a quali- 
fying therapeutic discovery project under such section 
48D.". 

(2) Section 280C of such Code is amended by adding at the 
end the following new subsection: 

"(g) Qualifying Therapeutic Discovery Project Credit. — 

"(1) In general. — No deduction shall be allowed for that 
portion of the qualified investment (as defined in section 
48D(b)) otherwise allowable as a deduction for the taxable year 
which — 

"(A) would be qualified research expenses (as denned 
in section 41(b)), basic research expenses (as defined in 
section 41(e)(2)), or qualified clinical testing expenses (as 
defined in section 45C(b)) if the credit under section 41 or 
section 45C were allowed with respect to such expenses for 
such taxable year, and 

"(B) is equal to the amount of the credit determined 
for such taxable year under section 48D(a), reduced by — 
"(i) the amount disallowed as a deduction by rea- 
son of section 48D(e)(2)(B), and 

"(ii) the amount of any basis reduction under sec- 
tion 48D(e)(l). 

"(2) Similar rule where taxpayer capitalizes rather 
than deducts expenses. — In the case of expenses described in 
paragraph (1)(A) taken into account in determining the credit 
under section 48D for the taxable year, if — 

"(A) the amount of the portion of the credit determined 
under such section with respect to such expenses, exceeds 
"(B) the amount allowable as a deduction for such tax- 
able year for such expenses (determined without regard to 
paragraph (1)), 

the amount chargeable to capital account for the taxable year 
for such expenses shall be reduced by the amount of such ex- 
cess. 

"(3) Controlled groups. — Paragraph (3) of subsection (b) 
shall apply for purposes of this subsection.". 

(d) Clerical Amendment. — The table of sections for subpart E 
of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to sec- 
tion 48C the following new item: 

"Sec. 48D. Qualifying therapeutic discovery project credit.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9023 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



830 



(e) Grants for Qualified Investments in Therapeutic Dis- 
covery Projects in Lieu of Tax Credits. — 

(1) In general. — Upon application, the Secretary of the 
Treasury shall, subject to the requirements of this subsection, 
provide a grant to each person who makes a qualified invest- 
ment in a qualifying therapeutic discovery project in the 
amount of 50 percent of such investment. No grant shall be 
made under this subsection with respect to any investment un- 
less such investment is made during a taxable year beginning 
in 2009 or 2010. 

(2) Application. — 

(A) In general. — At the stated election of the appli- 
cant, an application for certification under section 
48D(d)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for a credit 
under such section for the taxable year of the applicant 
which begins in 2009 shall be considered to be an applica- 
tion for a grant under paragraph (1) for such taxable year. 

(B) Taxable years beginning in 2010. — An application 
for a grant under paragraph (1) for a taxable year begin- 
ning in 2010 shall be submitted — 

(i) not earlier than the day after the last day of 
such taxable year, and 

(ii) not later than the due date (including exten- 
sions) for filing the return of tax for such taxable year. 

(C) Information to be submitted. — An application 
for a grant under paragraph (1) shall include such infor- 
mation and be in such form as the Secretary may require 
to state the amount of the credit allowable (but for the re- 
ceipt of a grant under this subsection) under section 48D 
for the taxable year for the qualified investment with re- 
spect to which such application is made. 

(3) Time for payment of grant. — 

(A) In general. — The Secretary of the Treasury shall 
make payment of the amount of any grant under para- 
graph (1) during the 30-day period beginning on the later 
of— 

(i) the date of the application for such grant, or 

(ii) the date the qualified investment for which the 
grant is being made is made. 

(B) Regulations. — In the case of investments of an 
ongoing nature, the Secretary shall issue regulations to de- 
termine the date on which a qualified investment shall be 
deemed to have been made for purposes of this paragraph. 

(4) Qualified investment. — For purposes of this sub- 
section, the term "qualified investment" means a qualified in- 
vestment that is certified under section 48D(d) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 for purposes of the credit under such 
section 48D. 

(5) Application of certain rules. — 

(A) In general. — In making grants under this sub- 
section, the Secretary of the Treasury shall apply rules 
similar to the rules of section 50 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986. In applying such rules, any increase in tax 
under chapter 1 of such Code by reason of an investment 

June 9, 2010 



831 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 9023 



ceasing to be a qualified investment shall be imposed on 
the person to whom the grant was made. 
(B) Special rules. — 

(i) Recapture of excessive grant amounts. — If 
the amount of a grant made under this subsection ex- 
ceeds the amount allowable as a grant under this sub- 
section, such excess shall be recaptured under sub- 
paragraph (A) as if the investment to which such ex- 
cess portion of the grant relates had ceased to be a 
qualified investment immediately after such grant was 
made. 

(ii) Grant information not treated as return 
information. — In no event shall the amount of a 
grant made under paragraph (1), the identity of the 
person to whom such grant was made, or a description 
of the investment with respect to which such grant 
was made be treated as return information for pur- 
poses of section 6103 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986. 

(6) Exception for certain non-taxpayers. — The Sec- 
retary of the Treasury shall not make any grant under this 
subsection to — 

(A) any Federal, State, or local government (or any po- 
litical subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof), 

(B) any organization described in section 501(c) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from tax under 
section 501(a) of such Code, 

(C) any entity referred to in paragraph (4) of section 
54(j) of such Code, or 

(D) any partnership or other pass-thru entity any 
partner (or other holder of an equity or profits interest) of 
which is described in subparagraph (A), (B) or (C). 

In the case of a partnership or other pass-thru entity described 
in subparagraph (D), partners and other holders of any equity 
or profits interest shall provide to such partnership or entity 
such information as the Secretary of the Treasury may require 
to carry out the purposes of this paragraph. 

(7) Secretary. — Any reference in this subsection to the 
Secretary of the Treasury shall be treated as including the Sec- 
retary's delegate. 

(8) Other terms. — Any term used in this subsection which 
is also used in section 48D of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 shall have the same meaning for purposes of this sub- 
section as when used in such section. 

(9) Denial of double benefit. — No credit shall be al- 
lowed under section 46(6) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
by reason of section 48D of such Code for any investment for 
which a grant is awarded under this subsection. 

(10) Appropriations. — There is hereby appropriated to the 
Secretary of the Treasury such sums as may be necessary to 
carry out this subsection. 

(11) Termination. — The Secretary of the Treasury shall 
not make any grant to any person under this subsection unless 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 9023 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



832 



the application of such person for such grant is received before 
January 1, 2013. 

(12) Protecting middle class families from tax in- 
creases. — It is the sense of the Senate that the Senate should 
reject any procedural maneuver that would raise taxes on mid- 
dle class families, such as a motion to commit the pending leg- 
islation to the Committee on Finance, which is designed to kill 
legislation that provides tax cuts for American workers and 
families, including the affordability tax credit and the small 
business tax credit. 

(f) Effective Date. — The amendments made by subsections 
(a) through (d) of this section shall apply to amounts paid or in- 
curred after December 31, 2008, in taxable years beginning after 
such date. 

[Section 10908, p. 923, provided an exclusion for assistance 
provided to participants in State student loan repayment programs 
for certain health professionals] 

[Note: Amendments made by title X to provisions in titles I-IX 
have been incorporated into the provisions above and the text of the 
amendments are not repeated below. For any section in title X for 
which all of the provisions are so incorporated, the notation 
"[amendments fully incorporated above]"~\ 



833 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10103 



TITLE X— STRENGTHENING QUALITY, 
AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE FOR ALL 
AMERICANS 

Subtitle A — Provisions Relating to Title I 

SEC. 10101. AMENDMENTS TO SUBTITLE A [AMENDMENTS FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Replaced section 2711 of the Public Health Service Act, as 
added by section 1001(5)] 

(b) [Struck and inserted language in section 2715(a) of the Pub- 
lic Health Service Act, as added by section 1001(5)1 

(c) [Inserted a new section 2715A into subpart II of part A of 
title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act, as added by section 
1001(5)1 

(d) [Replaced section 2716 of the Public Health Service Act, as 
added by section 1001(5)1 

(e) [Amended section 2717 of the Public Health Service Act, as 
added by section 1001(5), by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) 
and inserting a new subsection (c)1 

(f) [Replaced section 2718 of the Public Health Service Act, as 
added by section 1001(5)1 

(g) [Replaced section 2719 of the Public Health Service Act, as 
added by section 1001(4)1 

(h) [Inserted a new section 2719A into subpart II of part A of 
title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act, as added by section 
1001(5)1 

(i) [Added a subparagraph (C) to subsection (c)(1) and a new 
subsection (d) to section 2794 of the Public Health Service Act, as 
added by section 10031 

SEC. 10102. AMENDMENTS TO SUBTITLE B [AMENDMENTS FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Amended section 1102(a)(2)(B)1 

(b) [Amended section 1103(a), including rewriting paragraph 
(2) of such sectionl 

SEC. 10103. AMENDMENTS TO SUBTITLE C [AMENDMENTS FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Made an insertion into section 2701(a)(5) of the Public 
Health Service Act, as added by section 1201(4)1 

(b) [Struck language in section 2708 of the Public Health Serv- 
ice Act, as added by section 1201(4)1 

(c) [Added a section 2709 into subpart I of part A of title XXVII 
of the Public Health Service Act, as added by section 1201(4)1 

(d) [Amended section 1251(a) in paragraph (2) and by adding 
a new paragraph (3); further amended by section 2301(a) of HCERA 
by adding an additional paragraph (4)1 

(e) [Inserted additional matter into section 12531 

(f) [Redesignated section 1253 of subtitle C of title I as section 
1255 and inserted a new sections 1253 (relating to annual report on 
self-insured plans) and 1254 ( relating to study of large group mar- 
ket)] 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10104 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



834 



SEC. 10104. AMENDMENTS TO SUBTITLE D. 

(a) [Replaced section 1301(a)(2)~\ 

(b) [Amended section 1302 in subsection (d)(2)(B) and adding 
a new subsection (g)~\ 

(c) [Replaced section 1303] 

(d) [Amended section 1304 by adding a new subsection (e)] 

(e) [Amended section 1311(d) by replacing paragraph (3)(B)(ii) 
and by inserting language in paragraph (6)(A)] 

(f) [Amended section 1311(e) in paragraph (2) and by adding 
a new paragraph (3)] 

(g) [Amended section 1311(g)(1) by adding a new subparagraph 

(En 

(h) [Amended language in section 1311(i)(2)(B)~\ 

(i) [Amended subsections (a)(1), (e), and (f)(l)(A)(ii) of section 

13m 

(j)(l) Subparagraph (B) of section 1313(a)(6) of this Act is here- 
by deemed null, void, and of no effect. 

(2) Section 3730(e) of title 31, United States Code, is amended 
by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the following: 

"(4)(A) The court shall dismiss an action or claim under 
this section, unless opposed by the Government, if substan- 
tially the same allegations or transactions as alleged in the ac- 
tion or claim were publicly disclosed — 

"(i) in a Federal criminal, civil, or administrative hear- 
ing in which the Government or its agent is a party; 

"(ii) in a congressional, Government Accountability Of- 
fice, or other Federal report, hearing, audit, or investiga- 
tion; or 

"(hi) from the news media, 
unless the action is brought by the Attorney General or the 
person bringing the action is an original source of the informa- 
tion. 

"(B) For purposes of this paragraph, "original source" 
means an individual who either (i) prior to a public disclosure 
under subsection (e)(4)(a), has voluntarily disclosed to the Gov- 
ernment the information on which allegations or transactions 
in a claim are based, or (2) who has knowledge that is inde- 
pendent of and materially adds to the publicly disclosed allega- 
tions or transactions, and who has voluntarily provided the in- 
formation to the Government before filing an action under this 
section.". 

(k) [Inserted new paragraph (4) in section 1313(b)~\ 
(1) [Inserted new paragraph (2) in section 1322(bj\ 
(m) [Struck section 1323] 
(n) [Amended section 1324(a)] 

(o) [Amended subsections (d)(3)(A)(i) and (e)(1)(B) of section 
1331] 

(p) [Struck subsection (b) of section 1333] 

(q) [Added section 1334 to part IV of subtitle D of title I] 

SEC. 10105. AMENDMENTS TO SUBTITLE E [AMENDMENTS FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Amended section 36B(b)(3)(A)(ii) of the IRC, as added by 
section 1401(a)] 

June 9, 2010 



835 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10108 



(b) [Amended section 36B(c)(l)(A) of the IRC, as added by sec- 
tion 1401(a)] 

(c) [Amended section 36B(c)(2)(C)(iv) of the IRC, as added by 
section 1401(a)~\ 

(d) [Added paragraph (3) of section 1401(d)] 

(e) (1) [Amended subparagraph (B) of section 45R(d)(3) of the 
IRC, added by section 1421(a)] 

(2) [Amended section 45R of the IRC, added by section 1421(a)] 

(3) [Amended section 280C(h) of the IRC, added by section 
1421(d)(1)] 

(4) [Amended section 1421(f)] 

(f) [Added section 1416] 

SEC. 10106. AMENDMENTS TO SUBTITLE F [AMENDMENTS FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Replaced section 1501(a)(2)] 

(b) (1) [Replaced section 5000A(b)(l) of the IRC, added by sec- 
tion 1501(b)] 

(2) [Replaced paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 5000A(c) of the 
IRC, added by section 1501(b)] 

(3) [Amended section 5000A(c)(3) of the IRC, added by section 
1501(b)] 

(c) [Replaced section 5000A(d)(2)(A) of the IRC, added by sec- 
tion 1501(b)] 

(d) [Replaced section 5000A(e)(l)(C) of the IRC, added by sec- 
tion 1501(b)] 

(e) [Replaced section 4980H(b) of the IRC, added by section 
1513(a)] 

(f) (1) [Amended section 4980H(d)(4)(A) of the IRC, added by 
section 1513(a)] 

(2) [Replaced section 4980H(d)(2)(D) of the IRC, added by sec- 
tion 1513(a)] 

(g) [Added matter at the end of section 6056(b) of the IRC, 
added by section 1514(a)] 

SEC. 10107. AMENDMENTS TO SUBTITLE G [AMENDMENTS FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Amended section 1562] 

(b) [Redesignated section 1562 as section 1563 and inserted 
new sections 1562 (relating to a GAO study) &amp; 1563 (relating to 
small business procurement] 

SEC. 10108. FREE CHOICE VOUCHERS. 

(a) In General. — An offering employer shall provide free 
choice vouchers to each qualified employee of such employer. 

(b) Offering Employer. — For purposes of this section, the 
term "offering employer" means any employer who — 

(1) offers minimum essential coverage to its employees 
consisting of coverage through an eligible employer-sponsored 
plan; and 

(2) pays any portion of the costs of such plan. 

(c) Qualified Employee. — For purposes of this section — 

(1) In general. — The term "qualified employee" means, 
with respect to any plan year of an offering employer, any em- 
ployee — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10108 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



836 



(A) whose required contribution (as determined under 
section 5000A(e)(l)(B)) for minimum essential coverage 
through an eligible employer-sponsored plan — 

(i) exceeds 8 percent of such employee's household 
income for the taxable year described in section 
1412(b)(1)(B) which ends with or within in the plan 
year; and 

(ii) does not exceed 9.8 percent of such employee's 
household income for such taxable year; 

(B) whose household income for such taxable year is 
not greater than 400 percent of the poverty line for a fam- 
ily of the size involved; and 

(C) who does not participate in a health plan offered 
by the offering employer. 

(2) Indexing. — In the case of any calendar year beginning 
after 2014, the Secretary shall adjust the 8 percent under 
paragraph (l)(A)(i) and 9.8 percent under paragraph (l)(A)(ii) 
for the calendar year to reflect the rate of premium growth be- 
tween the preceding calendar year and 2013 over the rate of 
income growth for such period. 

(d) Free Choice Voucher. — 

(1) Amount. — 

(A) In general. — The amount of any free choice 
voucher provided under subsection (a) shall be equal to the 
monthly portion of the cost of the eligible employer-spon- 
sored plan which would have been paid by the employer if 
the employee were covered under the plan with respect to 
which the employer pays the largest portion of the cost of 
the plan. Such amount shall be equal to the amount the 
employer would pay for an employee with self-only cov- 
erage unless such employee elects family coverage (in 
which case such amount shall be the amount the employer 
would pay for family coverage). 

(B) Determination of cost. — The cost of any health 
plan shall be determined under the rules similar to the 
rules of section 2204 of the Public Health Service Act, ex- 
cept that such amount shall be adjusted for age and cat- 
egory of enrollment in accordance with regulations estab- 
lished by the Secretary. 

(2) Use of vouchers. — An Exchange shall credit the 
amount of any free choice voucher provided under subsection 
(a) to the monthly premium of any qualified health plan in the 
Exchange in which the qualified employee is enrolled and the 
offering employer shall pay any amounts so credited to the Ex- 
change. 

(3) Payment of excess amounts. — If the amount of the 
free choice voucher exceeds the amount of the premium of the 
qualified health plan in which the qualified employee is en- 
rolled for such month, such excess shall be paid to the em- 
ployee. 

(e) Other Definitions. — Any term used in this section which 
is also used in section 5000A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
shall have the meaning given such term under such section 5000A. 

(f) Exclusion From Income for Employee. — 

June 9, 2010 



837 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10108 



(1) In general. — Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting 
after section 139C the following new section: 

"SEC. 139D. FREE CHOICE VOUCHERS. 

"Gross income shall not include the amount of any free choice 
voucher provided by an employer under section 10108 of the Pa- 
tient Protection and Affordable Care Act to the extent that the 
amount of such voucher does not exceed the amount paid for a 
qualified health plan (as defined in section 1301 of such Act) by the 
taxpayer.". 

(2) Clerical amendment. — The table of sections for part 
III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by 
inserting after the item relating to section 139C the following 
new item: 

"Sec. 139D. Free choice vouchers.". 

(3) Effective date. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section shall apply to vouchers provided after December 31, 
2013. 

(g) Deduction Allowed to Employer. — 

(1) In general. — Section 162(a) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following 
new sentence: "For purposes of paragraph (1), the amount of 
a free choice voucher provided under section 10108 of the Pa- 
tient Protection and Affordable Care Act shall be treated as an 
amount for compensation for personal services actually ren- 
dered.". 

(2) Effective date. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section shall apply to vouchers provided after December 31, 
2013. 

(h) Voucher Taken Into Account in Determining Premium 
Credit. — 

(1) [Added a subparagraph (D) to section 36(c)(2) of the 
IRC, added by section 1401 1 

(2) Effective date. — The amendment made by this sub- 
section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 
31, 2013. 

(i) Coordination With Employer Responsibilities. — 

(1) Shared responsibility penalty. — 

(A) [Added a paragraph (3) to section 4980H(c) of the 
IRC, added by section 15131 

(B) Effective date. — The amendment made by this 
paragraph shall apply to months beginning after December 
31, 2013. 

(2) [Amended section 18B(a)(3) of FLSA, added by section 
15121 

(j) Employer Reporting. — 

(1) [Amended section 6056(a) of the IRC, added by section 
15141 

(2) [Replaced subsection (f) of section 6056 of the IRC, 
added by section 15141 

(3) [Made miscellaneous conforming amendments to sec- 
tions 6056 and 6724(d) of the IRC, added by section 1514, as 
well as a table of sections amendmentl 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10109 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



838 



(4) Effective date. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section shall apply to periods beginning after December 31, 
2013. 

SEC. 10109. DEVELOPMENT OF STANDARDS FOR FINANCIAL AND AD- 
MINISTRATIVE TRANSACTIONS. 

(a) Additional Transaction Standards and Operating 
Rules. — 

(1) Development of additional transaction standards 
and operating rules. — Section 1173(a) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1320d-2(a)), as amended by section 1104(b)(2), 
is amended — 

(A) in paragraph (1)(B), by inserting before the period 
the following: ", and subject to the requirements under 
paragraph (5)"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 
"(5) Consideration of standardization of activities 

and items. — 

"(A) In GENERAL. — For purposes of carrying out para- 
graph (1)(B), the Secretary shall solicit, not later than Jan- 
uary 1, 2012, and not less than every 3 years thereafter, 
input from entities described in subparagraph (B) on — 

"(i) whether there could be greater uniformity in 
financial and administrative activities and items, as 
determined appropriate by the Secretary; and 

"(ii) whether such activities should be considered 
financial and administrative transactions (as described 
in paragraph (1)(B)) for which the adoption of stand- 
ards and operating rules would improve the operation 
of the health care system and reduce administrative 
costs. 

"(B) Solicitation of input. — For purposes of sub- 
paragraph (A), the Secretary shall seek input from — 

"(i) the National Committee on Vital and Health 
Statistics, the Health Information Technology Policy 
Committee, and the Health Information Technology 
Standards Committee; and 

"(ii) standard setting organizations and stake- 
holders, as determined appropriate by the Secretary.". 

(b) Activities and Items for Initial Consideration. — For 
purposes of section 1173(a)(5) of the Social Security Act, as added 
by subsection (a), the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in 
this section referred to as the "Secretary") shall, not later than 
January 1, 2012, seek input on activities and items relating to the 
following areas: 

(1) Whether the application process, including the use of a 
uniform application form, for enrollment of health care pro- 
viders by health plans could be made electronic and standard- 
ized. 

(2) Whether standards and operating rules described in 
section 1173 of the Social Security Act should apply to the 
health care transactions of automobile insurance, worker's 
compensation, and other programs or persons not described in 
section 1172(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320d-l(a)). 

June 9, 2010 



839 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10201 



(3) Whether standardized forms could apply to financial 
audits required by health plans, Federal and State agencies 
(including State auditors, the Office of the Inspector General of 
the Department of Health and Human Services, and the Cen- 
ters for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services), and other relevant en- 
tities as determined appropriate by the Secretary. 

(4) Whether there could be greater transparency and con- 
sistency of methodologies and processes used to establish claim 
edits used by health plans (as described in section 1171(5) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320d(5))). 

(5) Whether health plans should be required to publish 
their timeliness of payment rules. 

(c) ICD Coding Crosswalks. — 

(1) ICD-9 to icd-10 crosswalk. — The Secretary shall task 
the ICD-9-CM Coordination and Maintenance Committee to 
convene a meeting, not later than January 1, 2011, to receive 
input from appropriate stakeholders (including health plans, 
health care providers, and clinicians) regarding the crosswalk 
between the Ninth and Tenth Revisions of the International 
Classification of Diseases (ICD-9 and ICD-10, respectively) 
that is posted on the website of the Centers for Medicare &amp; 
Medicaid Services, and make recommendations about appro- 
priate revisions to such crosswalk. 

(2) Revision of crosswalk. — For purposes of the cross- 
walk described in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall make ap- 
propriate revisions and post any such revised crosswalk on the 
website of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services. 

(3) Use of revised crosswalk. — For purposes of para- 
graph (2), any revised crosswalk shall be treated as a code set 
for which a standard has been adopted by the Secretary for 
purposes of section 1173(c)(1)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1320d-2(c)(l)(B)). 

(4) Subsequent crosswalks. — For subsequent revisions of 
the International Classification of Diseases that are adopted by 
the Secretary as a standard code set under section 1173(c) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320d-2(c)), the Secretary 
shall, after consultation with the appropriate stakeholders, 
post on the website of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid 
Services a crosswalk between the previous and subsequent 
version of the International Classification of Diseases not later 
than the date of implementation of such subsequent revision. 

Subtitle B — Provisions Relating to Title II 
PART 1— MEDICAID AND CHIP 

SEC. 10201. AMENDMENTS TO THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT AND TITLE 
II OF THIS ACT. 

(a)(1) [Replaced section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IX) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act, as added by section 2004(a)~\ 

(2) Section 1902(a)(10) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396a(a)(10), as amended by section 2001(a)(5)(A), is amended in 
the matter following subparagraph (G), by striking "and (XV)" and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10201 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



840 



inserting "(XV)", and by inserting "and (XVI) if an individual is de- 
scribed in subclause (IX) of subparagraph (A)(i) and is also de- 
scribed in subclause (VIII) of that subparagraph, the medical as- 
sistance shall be made available to the individual through sub- 
clause (IX) instead of through subclause (VIII)" before the semi- 
colon. 

(3) [Amended section 2004(d)~\ 

(b) [Amended section 1902(k)(2) of the Social Security Act, as 
added by section 2001(a)(4)(A)~\ 

(c) Section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d), 
as amended by sections 2001(a)(3), 2001(a)(5)(C), 2006, and 
4107(a)(2), is amended— 

(1) in subsection (a), in the matter preceding paragraph 
(1), by inserting in clause (xiv), "or 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IX)" before 
the comma; 

(2) in subsection (b), in the first sentence, by inserting ", 
(z)," before "and (aa)"; 

(3) in subsection (y) — 

(A) in paragraph (l)(B)(ii)(II), in the first sentence, by 
inserting "includes inpatient hospital services," after "100 
percent of the poverty line, that"; and [subclause (II) was 
redesignated by section 1201(1)(A) ofHCERA] 

(B) [Amended paragraph (2)(A)~\ 

(4) by inserting after subsection (y) the following: 
"(z) Equitable Support for Certain States. — 

"(1) [As revised by section 1201(2)(A) ofHCERA] (A) Dur- 
ing the period that begins on January 1, 2014, and ends on De- 
cember 31, 2015, notwithstanding subsection (b), the Federal 
medical assistance percentage otherwise determined under 
subsection (b) with respect to a fiscal year occurring during 
that period shall be increased by 2.2 percentage points for any 
State described in subparagraph (B) for amounts expended for 
medical assistance for individuals who are not newly eligible 
(as denned in subsection (y)(2)) individuals described in sub- 
clause (VIII) of section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i). 

"(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), a State described 
in this subparagraph is a State that — 

"(i) is an expansion State described in paragraph (3); 
"(ii) the Secretary determines will not receive any pay- 
ments under this title on the basis of an increased Federal 
medical assistance percentage under subsection (y) for ex- 
penditures for medical assistance for newly eligible indi- 
viduals (as so denned); and 

"(hi) has not been approved by the Secretary to divert 
a portion of the DSH allotment for a State to the costs of 
providing medical assistance or other health benefits cov- 
erage under a waiver that is in effect on July 2009. 
"(2) [Paragraph (2) — shown below — substituted for pre- 
vious paragraphs (2) - (4) by section 1201(2)(B) ofHCERA] (A) 
For calendar quarters in 2014 and each year thereafter, the 
Federal medical assistance percentage otherwise determined 
under subsection (b) for an expansion State described in para- 
graph (3) with respect to medical assistance for individuals de- 
scribed in section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII) who are nonpregnant 

June 9, 2010 



841 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10201 



childless adults with respect to whom the State may require 
enrollment in benchmark coverage under section 1937 shall be 
equal to the percent specified in subparagraph (B)(i) for such 
year. 

"(B)(i) The percent specified in this subparagraph for a 
State for a year is equal to the Federal medical assistance per- 
centage (as defined in the first sentence of subsection (b)) for 
the State increased by a number of percentage points equal to 
the transition percentage (specified in clause (ii) for the year) 
of the number of percentage points by which — 

"(I) such Federal medical assistance percentage for the 

State, is less than 

"(II) the percent specified in subsection (y)(l) for the 

year. 

"(ii) The transition percentage specified in this clause for — 
"(I) 2014 is 50 percent; 
"(II) 2015 is 60 percent; 
"(III) 2016 is 70 percent; 
"(IV) 2017 is 80 percent; 
"(V) 2018 is 90 percent; and 

"(VI) 2019 and each subsequent year is 100 percent. 
[Previous paragraphs (3) and (4) stricken by section 1201(2)(B) 
ofHCERA] 

"(3) [this paragraph added originally as a subclause (II) of 
paragraph (l)(B)(ii) of subsection (y) by section 2001(a)(3), 
amended by section 10201(c), and redesignated as paragraph 
(5) of subsection (z) by section 1201(1)(A) of HCERA, and redes- 
ignated as paragraph (3) and amended by section 1201(2)(C) of 
HCERA\ A State is an expansion State if, on the date of the 
enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 
the State offers health benefits coverage statewide to parents 
and nonpregnant, childless adults whose income is at least 100 
percent of the poverty line, includes inpatient hospital services, 
that is not dependent on access to employer coverage, employer 
contribution, or employment and is not limited to premium as- 
sistance, hospital-only benefits, a high deductible health plan, 
or alternative benefits under a demonstration program author- 
ized under section 1938. A State that offers health benefits cov- 
erage to only parents or only nonpregnant childless adults de- 
scribed in the preceding sentence shall not be considered to be 
an expansion State."; 

(5) [Struck and inserted language in subsection (aa)] 

(6) by adding after subsection (bb), the following: 

"(cc) Requirement for Certain States. — Notwithstanding 
subsections (y), (z), and (aa), in the case of a State that requires 
political subdivisions within the State to contribute toward the 
non-Federal share of expenditures required under the State plan 
under section 1902(a)(2), the State shall not be eligible for an in- 
crease in its Federal medical assistance percentage under such sub- 
sections if it requires that political subdivisions pay a greater per- 
centage of the non-Federal share of such expenditures, or a greater 
percentage of the non-Federal share of payments under section 
1923, than the respective percentages that would have been re- 
quired by the State under the State plan under this title, State 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10201 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



842 



law, or both, as in effect on December 31, 2009, and without regard 
to any such increase. Voluntary contributions by a political subdivi- 
sion to the non-Federal share of expenditures under the State plan 
under this title or to the non-Federal share of payments under sec- 
tion 1923, shall not be considered to be required contributions for 
purposes of this subsection. The treatment of voluntary contribu- 
tions, and the treatment of contributions required by a State under 
the State plan under this title, or State law, as provided by this 
subsection, shall also apply to the increases in the Federal medical 
assistance percentage under section 5001 of the American Recovery 
and Reinvestment Act of 2009.". 

(d) [Amended section 1108(g)(4)(B) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1308(g)(4)(B)), as added by section 2005(b)] 

(e) (1) Section 1923(f) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396r-4(f)), as amended by section 2551, is amended — 

(A) in paragraph (6) — 

(i) by striking the paragraph heading and inserting 
the following: "Allotment adjustments"; and 

(ii) in subparagraph (B), by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing: 

"(hi) Allotment for 2D, 3rd, and 4th quarter 

OF FISCAL YEAR 2012, FISCAL YEAR 2013, AND SUC- 
CEEDING fiscal years. — Notwithstanding the table set 
forth in paragraph (2) or paragraph (7): 

"(I) 2D, 3RD, AND 4TH QUARTER OF FISCAL YEAR 

2012. — The DSH allotment for Hawaii for the 2d, 
3rd, and 4th quarters of fiscal year 2012 shall be 
$7,500,000. 

"(II) Treatment as a low-dsh state for fis- 
cal YEAR 2013 AND SUCCEEDING FISCAL YEARS. — 
With respect to fiscal year 2013, and each fiscal 
year thereafter, the DSH allotment for Hawaii 
shall be increased in the same manner as allot- 
ments for low DSH States are increased for such 
fiscal year under clause (hi) of paragraph (5)(B). 

"(Ill) Certain hospital payments. — The Sec- 
retary may not impose a limitation on the total 
amount of payments made to hospitals under the 
QUEST section 1115 Demonstration Project ex- 
cept to the extent that such limitation is nec- 
essary to ensure that a hospital does not receive 
payments in excess of the amounts described in 
subsection (g), or as necessary to ensure that such 
payments under the waiver and such payments 
pursuant to the allotment provided in this clause 
do not, in the aggregate in any year, exceed the 
amount that the Secretary determines is equal to 
the Federal medical assistance percentage compo- 
nent attributable to disproportionate share hos- 
pital payment adjustments for such year that is 
reflected in the budget neutrality provision of the 
QUEST Demonstration Project."; and 
[(B) in paragraph (7) — [Amendments superseded by 
amendment made by section 1203(w) of HCERAW 

June 9, 2010 



843 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10201 



[(i) in subparagraph (A), in the matter preceding 
clause (i), by striking "subparagraph (E)" and inserting 
"subparagraphs (E) and (G)";] 
[(h) in subparagraph (B) — ] 

[(I) in clause (i), by striking subclauses (I) and 
(II), and inserting the following:] 

["(I) if the State is a low DSH State described 
in paragraph (5)(B) and has spent not more than 
99.90 percent of the DSH allotments for the State 
on average for the period of fiscal years 2004 
through 2008, as of September 30, 2009, the appli- 
cable percentage is equal to 25 percent;] 

["(II) if the State is a low DSH State de- 
scribed in paragraph (5)(B) and has spent more 
than 99.90 percent of the DSH allotments for the 
State on average for the period of fiscal years 
2004 through 2008, as of September 30, 2009, the 
applicable percentage is equal to 17.5 percent;] 

["(III) if the State is not a low DSH State de- 
scribed in paragraph (5)(B) and has spent not 
more than 99.90 percent of the DSH allotments 
for the State on average for the period of fiscal 
years 2004 through 2008, as of September 30, 
2009, the applicable percentage is equal to 50 per- 
cent* 3.ncl] 

'["(IV) if the State is not a low DSH State de- 
scribed in paragraph (5)(B) and has spent more 
than 99.90 percent of the DSH allotments for the 
State on average for the period of fiscal years 
2004 through 2008, as of September 30, 2009, the 
applicable percentage is equal to 35 percent.";] 
[(II) in clause (ii), by striking subclauses (I) and 
(II), and inserting the following:] 

["(I) if the State is a low DSH State described 
in paragraph (5)(B) and has spent not more than 
99.90 percent of the DSH allotments for the State 
on average for the period of fiscal years 2004 
through 2008, as of September 30, 2009, the appli- 
cable percentage is equal to the product of the 
percentage reduction in uncovered individuals for 
the fiscal year from the preceding fiscal year and 
27.5 percent;] 

["(II) if the State is a low DSH State de- 
scribed in paragraph (5)(B) and has spent more 
than 99.90 percent of the DSH allotments for the 
State on average for the period of fiscal years 
2004 through 2008, as of September 30, 2009, the 
applicable percentage is equal to the product of 
the percentage reduction in uncovered individuals 
for the fiscal year from the preceding fiscal year 
and 20 percent;] 

["(III) if the State is not a low DSH State de- 
scribed in paragraph (5)(B) and has spent not 
more than 99.90 percent of the DSH allotments 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10201 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



844 



for the State on average for the period of fiscal 
years 2004 through 2008, as of September 30, 
2009, the applicable percentage is equal to the 
product of the percentage reduction in uncovered 
individuals for the fiscal year from the preceding 
fiscal year and 55 percent; and] 

["(IV) if the State is not a low DSH State de- 
scribed in paragraph (5)(B) and has spent more 
than 99.90 percent of the DSH allotments for the 
State on average for the period of fiscal years 
2004 through 2008, as of September 30, 2009, the 
applicable percentage is equal to the product of 
the percentage reduction in uncovered individuals 
for the fiscal year from the preceding fiscal year 
and 40 percent.";] 

[(Ill) in subparagraph (E), by striking "35 per- 
cent" and inserting "50 percent"; and] 

[(IV) by adding at the end the following:] 
["(G) Nonapplication. — The preceding provisions of 
this paragraph shall not apply to the DSH allotment deter- 
mined for the State of Hawaii for a fiscal year under para- 
graph (6).".] 

(f) [Struck subsection (b) of section 2551] 

(g) [Inserted sentence at the end of section 2105(d)(3)(B) of the 
Social Security Act, as added by section 2101(b)(1)] 

(h) [Replaced section 513(b)(2)(C)(i) of the Social Security Act, 
as added by section 2953] 

(i) Section 1115 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1315) is 
amended by inserting after subsection (c) the following: 

"(d)(1) An application or renewal of any experimental, pilot, or 
demonstration project undertaken under subsection (a) to promote 
the objectives of title XIX or XXI in a State that would result in 
an impact on eligibility, enrollment, benefits, cost-sharing, or fi- 
nancing with respect to a State program under title XIX or XXI (in 
this subsection referred to as a 'demonstration project') shall be 
considered by the Secretary in accordance with the regulations re- 
quired to be promulgated under paragraph (2). 

"(2) Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this 
subsection, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations relating to 
applications for, and renewals of, a demonstration project that pro- 
vide for — 

"(A) a process for public notice and comment at the State 
level, including public hearings, sufficient to ensure a meaning- 
ful level of public input; 

"(B) requirements relating to — 

"(i) the goals of the program to be implemented or re- 
newed under the demonstration project; 

"(ii) the expected State and Federal costs and coverage 
projections of the demonstration project; and 

"(hi) the specific plans of the State to ensure that the 
demonstration project will be in compliance with title XIX 
or XXI; 

June 9, 2010 



845 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10202 



"(C) a process for providing public notice and comment 
after the application is received by the Secretary, that is suffi- 
cient to ensure a meaningful level of public input; 

"(D) a process for the submission to the Secretary of peri- 
odic reports by the State concerning the implementation of" the 
demonstration project; and 

"(E) a process for the periodic evaluation by the Secretary 
of the demonstration project. 

"(3) The Secretary shall annually report to Congress con- 
cerning actions taken by the Secretary with respect to applications 
for demonstration projects under this section.". 

(j) {Added section 3512 to subtitle F of title 

SEC. 10202 [42 U.S.C. 1396d note]. INCENTIVES FOR STATES TO OFFER 
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES AS A LONG- 
TERM CARE ALTERNATIVE TO NURSING HOMES. 

(a) State Balancing Incentive Payments Program. — Not- 
withstanding section 1905(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396d(b)), in the case of a balancing incentive payment State, as 
defined in subsection (b), that meets the conditions described in 
subsection (c), during the balancing incentive period, the Federal 
medical assistance percentage determined for the State under sec- 
tion 1905(b) of such Act and, if applicable, increased under sub- 
section (z) or (aa) shall be increased by the applicable percentage 
points determined under subsection (d) with respect to eligible 
medical assistance expenditures described in subsection (e). 

(b) Balancing Incentive Payment State. — A balancing in- 
centive payment State is a State — 

(1) in which less than 50 percent of the total expenditures 
for medical assistance under the State Medicaid program for a 
fiscal year for long-term services and supports (as denned by 
the Secretary under subsection (f))(l)) are for non-institution- 
ally-based long-term services and supports described in sub- 
section (f)(1)(B); 

(2) that submits an application and meets the conditions 
described in subsection (c); and 

(3) that is selected by the Secretary to participate in the 
State balancing incentive payment program established under 
this section. 

(c) Conditions. — The conditions described in this subsection 
are the following: 

(1) Application. — The State submits an application to the 
Secretary that includes, in addition to such other information 
as the Secretary shall require — 

(A) a proposed budget that details the State's plan to 
expand and diversify medical assistance for non-institu- 
tionally-based long-term services and supports described in 
subsection (f)(1)(B) under the State Medicaid program dur- 
ing the balancing incentive period and achieve the target 
spending percentage applicable to the State under para- 
graph (2), including through structural changes to how the 
State furnishes such assistance, such as through the estab- 
lishment of a "no wrong door — single entry point system", 
optional presumptive eligibility, case management serv- 
ices, and the use of core standardized assessment instru- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10202 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



846 



ments, and that includes a description of the new or ex- 
panded offerings of such services that the State will pro- 
vide and the projected costs of such services; and 

(B) in the case of a State that proposes to expand the 
provision of home and community-based services under its 
State Medicaid program through a State plan amendment 
under section 1915(i) of the Social Security Act, at the op- 
tion of the State, an election to increase the income eligi- 
bility for such services from 150 percent of the poverty line 
to such higher percentage as the State may establish for 
such purpose, not to exceed 300 percent of the supple- 
mental security income benefit rate established by section 
1611(b)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1382(b)(1)). 

(2) Target spending percentages. — 

(A) In the case of a balancing incentive payment State 
in which less than 25 percent of the total expenditures for 
long-term services and supports under the State Medicaid 
program for fiscal year 2009 are for home and community- 
based services, the target spending percentage for the 
State to achieve by not later than October 1, 2015, is that 
25 percent of the total expenditures for long-term services 
and supports under the State Medicaid program are for 
home and community-based services. 

(B) In the case of any other balancing incentive pay- 
ment State, the target spending percentage for the State 
to achieve by not later than October 1, 2015, is that 50 
percent of the total expenditures for long-term services and 
supports under the State Medicaid program are for home 
and community-based services. 

(3) Maintenance of eligibility requirements. — The 
State does not apply eligibility standards, methodologies, or 
procedures for determining eligibility for medical assistance for 
non-institutionally-based long-term services and supports de- 
scribed in subsection (f)(1)(B) under the State Medicaid pro- 
gram that are more restrictive than the eligibility standards, 
methodologies, or procedures in effect for such purposes on De- 
cember 31, 2010. 

(4) Use of additional funds. — The State agrees to use 
the additional Federal funds paid to the State as a result of 
this section only for purposes of providing new or expanded of- 
ferings of non-institutionally-based long-term services and sup- 
ports described in subsection (f)(1)(B) under the State Medicaid 
program. 

(5) Structural changes. — The State agrees to make, not 
later than the end of the 6-month period that begins on the 
date the State submits an application under this section, the 
following changes: 

(A) "NO WRONG DOOR — SINGLE ENTRY POINT SYS- 
TEM". — Development of a statewide system to enable con- 
sumers to access all long-term services and supports 
through an agency, organization, coordinated network, or 
portal, in accordance with such standards as the State 
shall establish and that shall provide information regard- 
ing the availability of such services, how to apply for such 

June 9, 2010 



847 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10202 



services, referral services for services and supports other- 
wise available in the community, and determinations of fi- 
nancial and functional eligibility for such services and sup- 
ports, or assistance with assessment processes for financial 
and functional eligibility. 

(B) Conflict-free case management services. — 
Conflict-free case management services to develop a serv- 
ice plan, arrange for services and supports, support the 
beneficiary (and, if appropriate, the beneficiary's care- 
givers) in directing the provision of services and supports 
for the beneficiary, and conduct ongoing monitoring to as- 
sure that services and supports are delivered to meet the 
beneficiary's needs and achieve intended outcomes. 

(C) Core standardized assessment instruments. — 
Development of core standardized assessment instruments 
for determining eligibility for non-institutionally-based 
long-term services and supports described in subsection 
(f)(1)(B), which shall be used in a uniform manner 
throughout the State, to determine a beneficiary's needs 
for training, support services, medical care, transportation, 
and other services, and develop an individual service plan 
to address such needs. 

(6) Data collection. — The State agrees to collect from 
providers of services and through such other means as the 
State determines appropriate the following data: 

(A) Services data. — Services data from providers of 
non-institutionally-based long-term services and supports 
described in subsection (f)(1)(B) on a per-beneficiary basis 
and in accordance with such standardized coding proce- 
dures as the State shall establish in consultation with the 
Secretary. 

(B) Quality data. — Quality data on a selected set of 
core quality measures agreed upon by the Secretary and 
the State that are linked to population-specific outcomes 
measures and accessible to providers. 

(C) Outcomes measures. — Outcomes measures data 
on a selected set of core population-specific outcomes meas- 
ures agreed upon by the Secretary and the State that are 
accessible to providers and include — 

(i) measures of beneficiary and family caregiver 
experience with providers; 

(ii) measures of beneficiary and family caregiver 
satisfaction with services; and 

(iii) measures for achieving desired outcomes ap- 
propriate to a specific beneficiary, including employ- 
ment, participation in community life, health stability, 
and prevention of loss in function. 

(d) Applicable Percentage Points Increase in FMAP. — The 
applicable percentage points increase is — 

(1) in the case of a balancing incentive payment State sub- 
ject to the target spending percentage described in subsection 
(c)(2)(A), 5 percentage points; and 

(2) in the case of any other balancing incentive payment 
State, 2 percentage points. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10203 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



848 



(e) Eligible Medical Assistance Expenditures. — 

(1) In general. — Subject to paragraph (2), medical assist- 
ance described in this subsection is medical assistance for non- 
institutionally-based long-term services and supports described 
in subsection (f)(1)(B) that is provided by a balancing incentive 
payment State under its State Medicaid program during the 
balancing incentive payment period. 

(2) Limitation on payments. — In no case may the aggre- 
gate amount of payments made by the Secretary to balancing 
incentive payment States under this section during the bal- 
ancing incentive period exceed $3,000,000,000. 

(f) Definitions. — In this section: 

(1) Long-term services and supports defined. — The 
term "long-term services and supports" has the meaning given 
that term by Secretary and may include any of the following 
(as defined for purposes of State Medicaid programs): 

(A) Institutionally-based long-term services and 
SUPPORTS. — Services provided in an institution, including 
the following: 

(i) Nursing facility services. 

(ii) Services in an intermediate care facility for the 
mentally retarded described in subsection (a)(15) of 
section 1905 of such Act. 

(B) Non-institutionally-based long-term services 
and supports. — Services not provided in an institution, in- 
cluding the following: 

(i) Home and community-based services provided 
under subsection (c), (d), or (i) of section 1915 of such 
Act or under a waiver under section 1115 of such Act. 

(ii) Home health care services, 
(hi) Personal care services. 

(iv) Services described in subsection (a)(26) of sec- 
tion 1905 of such Act (relating to PACE program serv- 
ices). 

(v) Self-directed personal assistance services de- 
scribed in section 1915(j) of such Act. 

(2) Balancing incentive period. — The term "balancing 
incentive period" means the period that begins on October 1, 
2011, and ends on September 30, 2015. 

(3) Poverty line. — The term "poverty line" has the mean- 
ing given that term in section 2110(c)(5) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1397jj(c)(5)). 

(4) State medicaid program. — The term "State Medicaid 
program" means the State program for medical assistance pro- 
vided under a State plan under title XIX of the Social Security 
Act and under any waiver approved with respect to such State 
plan. 

SEC. 10203. EXTENSION OF FUNDING FOR CHIP THROUGH FISCAL 
YEAR 2015 AND OTHER CHIP-RELATED PROVISIONS. 

(a) {Inserted subparagraph (I) at the end of section 1311(c)(l)~\ 

(b) Effective as if included in the enactment of the Children's 
Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2009 (Public 
Law 111-3): 

June 9, 2010 



849 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10203 



(1) Section 1906(e)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396e(e)(2)) is amended by striking "means" and all that fol- 
lows through the period and inserting "has the meaning given 
that term in section 2105(c)(3)(A).". 

(2) (A) Section 1906A(a) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396e-l(a)), is amended by inserting before the period 
the following: "and the offering of such a subsidy is cost-effec- 
tive, as defined for purposes of section 2105(c)(3)(A)". 

(B) This Act shall be applied without regard to subpara- 
graph (A) of section 2003(a)(1) of this Act and that subpara- 
graph and the amendment made by that subparagraph are 
hereby deemed null, void, and of no effect. 

(3) Section 2105(c)(10) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1397ee(c)(10)) is amended— 

(A) in subparagraph (A), in the first sentence, by in- 
serting before the period the following: "if the offering of 
such a subsidy is cost-effective, as defined for purposes of 
paragraph (3)(A)"; 

(B) by striking subparagraph (M); and 

(C) by redesignating subparagraph (N) as subpara- 
graph (M). 

(4) Section 2105(c)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397ee(c)(3)(A)) is amended— 

(A) in the matter preceding clause (i), by striking "to" 
and inserting "to — "; and 

(B) in clause (ii), by striking the period and inserting 
a semicolon. 

(c) [Amended subsections (b) and (d)(3) of section 2105 of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397 ee), as amended by section 
21011 

(d) (1) Section 2104(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397dd(a)) is 
amended — 

(A) in paragraph (15), by striking "and" at the end; and 

(B) by striking paragraph (16) and inserting the following: 
"(16) for fiscal year 2013, $17,406,000,000; 

"(17) for fiscal year 2014, $19,147,000,000; and 
"(18) for fiscal year 2015, for purposes of making 2 semi- 
annual allotments — 

"(A) $2,850,000,000 for the period beginning on Octo- 
ber 1, 2014, and ending on March 31, 2015, and 

"(B) $2,850,000,000 for the period beginning on April 
1, 2015, and ending on September 30, 2015.". 
(2XA) Section 2104(m) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397dd(m)), as 
amended by section 2102(a)(1), is amended — 

(i) in the subsection heading, by striking "2013" and in- 
serting "2015"; 

(ii) in paragraph (2) — 

(I) in the paragraph heading, by striking "2012" and in- 
serting "2014"; and 

(II) by adding at the end the following: 

"(B) Fiscal years 2013 and 2014. — Subject to para- 
graphs (4) and (6), from the amount made available under 
paragraphs (16) and (17) of subsection (a) for fiscal years 
2013 and 2014, respectively, the Secretary shall compute 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10203 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



850 



a State allotment for each State (including the District of 
Columbia and each commonwealth and territory) for each 
such fiscal year as follows: 

"(i) Rebasing in fiscal year 2013. — For fiscal year 

2013, the allotment of the State is equal to the Fed- 
eral payments to the State that are attributable to 
(and countable towards) the total amount of allot- 
ments available under this section to the State in fis- 
cal year 2012 (including payments made to the State 
under subsection (n) for fiscal year 2012 as well as 
amounts redistributed to the State in fiscal year 
2012), multiplied by the allotment increase factor 
under paragraph (5) for fiscal year 2013. 

"(ii) Growth factor update for fiscal year 

2014. — For fiscal year 2014, the allotment of the State 
is equal to the sum of — 

"(I) the amount of the State allotment under 
clause (i) for fiscal year 2013; and 

"(II) the amount of any payments made to the 
State under subsection (n) for fiscal year 2013, 
multiplied by the allotment increase factor under 
paragraph (5) for fiscal year 2014."; 
(hi) in paragraph (3) — 

(I) in the paragraph heading, by striking "2013" 
and inserting "2015"; 

(II) in subparagraphs (A) and (B), by striking 
"paragraph (16)" each place it appears and inserting 
"paragraph (18)"; 

(III) in subparagraph (C) — 

(aa) by striking "2012" each place it appears 
and inserting "2014"; and 

(bb) by striking "2013" and inserting "2015"; 

and 

(IV) in subparagraph (D) — 

(aa) in clause (i)(I), by striking "subsection 
(a)(16)(A)" and inserting "subsection (a)(18)(A)"; 
and 

(bb) in clause (ii)(II), by striking "subsection 
(a)(16)(B)" and inserting "subsection (a)(18)(B)"; 

(iv) in paragraph (4), by striking "2013" and inserting 
"2015"; 

(v) in paragraph (6) — 

(I) in subparagraph (A), by striking "2013" and in- 
serting "2015"; and 

(II) in the flush language after and below sub- 
paragraph (B)(ii), by striking "or fiscal year 2012" and 
inserting ", fiscal year 2012, or fiscal year 2014"; and 

(vi) in paragraph (8) — 

(I) in the paragraph heading, by striking "2013" 
and inserting "2015"; and 

(II) by striking "2013" and inserting "2015". 

(B) Section 2104(n) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397dd(n)) is amend- 
ed— 

(i) in paragraph (2) — 

June 9, 2010 



851 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10203 



(I) in subparagraph (A)(ii) — 

(aa) by striking "2012" and inserting "2014"; and 
(bb) by striking "2013" and inserting "2015"; 

(II) in subparagraph (B) — 

(aa) by striking "2012" and inserting "2014"; and 
(bb) by striking "2013" and inserting "2015"; and 
(ii) in paragraph (3)(A), by striking "or a semi-annual allot- 
ment period for fiscal year 2013" and inserting "fiscal year 
2013, fiscal year 2014, or a semi-annual allotment period for 
fiscal year 2015". 

(C) Section 2105(g)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397ee(g)(4)) is 
amended — 

(i) in the paragraph heading, by striking "2013" and insert- 
ing "2015"; and 

(ii) in subparagraph (A), by striking "2013" and inserting 
"2015". 

(D) Section 2110(b) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397jj(b)) is amend- 
ed— 

(i) in paragraph (2)(B), by inserting "except as provided in 
paragraph (6)," before "a child"; and 

(ii) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 

"(6) Exceptions to exclusion of children of employ- 
ees OF A PUBLIC AGENCY IN THE STATE. — 

"(A) In general. — A child shall not be considered to 
be described in paragraph (2)(B) if — 

"(i) the public agency that employs a member of 
the child's family to which such paragraph applies sat- 
isfies subparagraph (B); or 

"(ii) subparagraph (C) applies to such child. 
"(B) Maintenance of effort with respect to per 

PERSON AGENCY CONTRIBUTION FOR FAMILY COVERAGE. — 

For purposes of subparagraph (A)(i), a public agency satis- 
fies this subparagraph if the amount of annual agency ex- 
penditures made on behalf of each employee enrolled in 
health coverage paid for by the agency that includes de- 
pendent coverage for the most recent State fiscal year is 
not less than the amount of such expenditures made by 
the agency for the 1997 State fiscal year, increased by the 
percentage increase in the medical care expenditure cat- 
egory of the Consumer Price Index for All-Urban Con- 
sumers (all items: U.S. City Average) for such preceding 
fiscal year. 

"(C) Hardship exception. — For purposes of subpara- 
graph (A)(ii), this subparagraph applies to a child if the 
State determines, on a case-by-case basis, that the annual 
aggregate amount of premiums and cost-sharing imposed 
for coverage of the family of the child would exceed 5 per- 
cent of such family's income for the year involved.". 

(E) Section 2113 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397mm) is amended— 

(i) in subsection (a)(1), by striking "2013" and inserting 
"2015"; and 

(ii) in subsection (g), by striking "$100,000,000 for the pe- 
riod of fiscal years 2009 through 2013" and inserting 
"$140,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2009 through 2015". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10211 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



852 



(F) Section 108 of Public Law 111-3 is amended by striking 
"$11,706,000,000" and all that follows through the second sentence 
and inserting "$15,361,000,000 to accompany the allotment made 
for the period beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on March 
31, 2015, under section 2104(a)(18)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397dd(a)(18)(A)), to remain available until expended. Such 
amount shall be used to provide allotments to States under para- 
graph (3) of section 2104(m) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1397dd(m)) for the first 6 months of fiscal year 2015 in the same 
manner as allotments are provided under subsection (a)(18)(A) of 
such section 2104 and subject to the same terms and conditions as 
apply to the allotments provided from such subsection (a)(18)(A).". 

PART 2— SUPPORT FOR PREGNANT AND 
PARENTING TEENS AND WOMEN 

SEC. 10211 [42 U.S.C. 18201]. DEFINITIONS. 

In this part: 

(1) Accompaniment. — The term "accompaniment" means 
assisting, representing, and accompanying a woman in seeking 
judicial relief for child support, child custody, restraining or- 
ders, and restitution for harm to persons and property, and in 
filing criminal charges, and may include the payment of court 
costs and reasonable attorney and witness fees associated 
therewith. 

(2) Eligible institution of higher education. — The 
term "eligible institution of higher education" means an insti- 
tution of higher education (as such term is defined in section 
101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001)) that 
has established and operates, or agrees to establish and oper- 
ate upon the receipt of a grant under this part, a pregnant and 
parenting student services office. 

(3) Community service center. — The term "community 
service center" means a non-profit organization that provides 
social services to residents of a specific geographical area via 
direct service or by contract with a local governmental agency. 

(4) High school. — The term "high school" means any pub- 
lic or private school that operates grades 10 through 12, inclu- 
sive, grades 9 through 12, inclusive or grades 7 through 12, in- 
clusive. 

(5) Intervention services. — The term "intervention serv- 
ices" means, with respect to domestic violence, sexual violence, 
sexual assault, or stalking, 24-hour telephone hotline services 
for police protection and referral to shelters. 

(6) Secretary. — The term "Secretary" means the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services. 

(7) State.— The term "State" includes the District of Co- 
lumbia, any commonwealth, possession, or other territory of 
the United States, and any Indian tribe or reservation. 

(8) Supportive social services. — The term "supportive 
social services" means transitional and permanent housing, vo- 
cational counseling, and individual and group counseling aimed 

June 9, 2010 



853 PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 10213 

at preventing domestic violence, sexual violence, sexual as- 
sault, or stalking. 

(9) Violence. — The term "violence" means actual violence 
and the risk or threat of violence. 

SEC. 10212 [42 U.S.C. 18202]. ESTABLISHMENT OF PREGNANCY ASSIST- 
ANCE FUND. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary, in collaboration and coordina- 
tion with the Secretary of Education (as appropriate), shall estab- 
lish a Pregnancy Assistance Fund to be administered by the Sec- 
retary, for the purpose of awarding competitive grants to States to 
assist pregnant and parenting teens and women. 

(b) Use of Fund. — A State may apply for a grant under sub- 
section (a) to carry out any activities provided for in section 10213. 

(c) Applications. — To be eligible to receive a grant under sub- 
section (a), a State shall submit to the Secretary an application at 
such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
Secretary may require, including a description of the purposes for 
which the grant is being requested and the designation of a State 
agency for receipt and administration of funding received under 
this part. 

SEC. 10213 [42 U.S.C. 18203]. PERMISSIBLE USES OF FUND. 

(a) In General. — A State shall use amounts received under a 
grant under section 10212 for the purposes described in this section 
to assist pregnant and parenting teens and women. 

(b) Institutions of Higher Education. — 

(1) In general. — A State may use amounts received under 
a grant under section 10212 to make funding available to eligi- 
ble institutions of higher education to enable the eligible insti- 
tutions to establish, maintain, or operate pregnant and par- 
enting student services. Such funding shall be used to supple- 
ment, not supplant, existing funding for such services. 

(2) Application. — An eligible institution of higher edu- 
cation that desires to receive funding under this subsection 
shall submit an application to the designated State agency at 
such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
the State agency may require. 

(3) Matching requirement. — An eligible institution of 
higher education that receives funding under this subsection 
shall contribute to the conduct of the pregnant and parenting 
student services office supported by the funding an amount 
from non-Federal funds equal to 25 percent of the amount of 
the funding provided. The non-Federal share may be in cash 
or in-kind, fairly evaluated, including services, facilities, sup- 
plies, or equipment. 

(4) Use of funds for assisting pregnant and parenting 
college students. — An eligible institution of higher edu- 
cation that receives funding under this subsection shall use 
such funds to establish, maintain or operate pregnant and par- 
enting student services and may use such funding for the fol- 
lowing programs and activities: 

(A) Conduct a needs assessment on campus and within 
the local community — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10213 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



854 



(i) to assess pregnancy and parenting resources, 
located on the campus or within the local community, 
that are available to meet the needs described in sub- 
paragraph (B); and 

(ii) to set goals for — 

(I) improving such resources for pregnant, 
parenting, and prospective parenting students; 
and 

(II) improving access to such resources. 

(B) Annually assess the performance of the eligible in- 
stitution in meeting the following needs of students en- 
rolled in the eligible institution who are pregnant or are 
parents: 

(i) The inclusion of maternity coverage and the 
availability of riders for additional family members in 
student health care. 

(ii) Family housing, 
(hi) Child care. 

(iv) Flexible or alternative academic scheduling, 
such as telecommuting programs, to enable pregnant 
or parenting students to continue their education or 
stay in school. 

(v) Education to improve parenting skills for 
mothers and fathers and to strengthen marriages. 

(vi) Maternity and baby clothing, baby food (in- 
cluding formula), baby furniture, and similar items to 
assist parents and prospective parents in meeting the 
material needs of their children. 

(vii) Post-partum counseling. 

(C) Identify public and private service providers, lo- 
cated on the campus of the eligible institution or within 
the local community, that are qualified to meet the needs 
described in subparagraph (B), and establishes programs 
with qualified providers to meet such needs. 

(D) Assist pregnant and parenting students, fathers or 
spouses in locating and obtaining services that meet the 
needs described in subparagraph (B). 

(E) If appropriate, provide referrals for prenatal care 
and delivery, infant or foster care, or adoption, to a stu- 
dent who requests such information. An office shall make 
such referrals only to service providers that serve the fol- 
lowing types of individuals: 

(i) Parents. 

(ii) Prospective parents awaiting adoption. 

(iii) Women who are pregnant and plan on par- 
enting or placing the child for adoption. 

(iv) Parenting or prospective parenting couples. 
(5) Reporting. — 

(A) Annual report by institutions. — 

(i) In general. — For each fiscal year that an eligi- 
ble institution of higher education receives funds 
under this subsection, the eligible institution shall 
prepare and submit to the State, by the date deter- 
mined by the State, a report that — 

June 9, 2010 



855 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10213 



(I) itemizes the pregnant and parenting stu- 
dent services office's expenditures for the fiscal 
year; 

(II) contains a review and evaluation of the 
performance of the office in fulfilling the require- 
ments of this section, using the specific perform- 
ance criteria or standards established under sub- 
paragraph (B)(i); and 

(III) describes the achievement of the office in 
meeting the needs listed in paragraph (4)(B) of 
the students served by the eligible institution, and 
the frequency of use of the office by such students, 
(ii) Performance criteria. — Not later than 180 

days before the date the annual report described in 
clause (i) is submitted, the State — 

(I) shall identify the specific performance cri- 
teria or standards that shall be used to prepare 
the report; and 

(II) may establish the form or format of the 
report. 

(B) Report by state. — The State shall annually pre- 
pare and submit a report on the findings under this sub- 
section, including the number of eligible institutions of 
higher education that were awarded funds and the number 
of students served by each pregnant and parenting student 
services office receiving funds under this section, to the 
Secretary. 

(c) Support for Pregnant and Parenting Teens. — A State 
may use amounts received under a grant under section 10212 to 
make funding available to eligible high schools and community 
service centers to establish, maintain or operate pregnant and par- 
enting services in the same general manner and in accordance with 
all conditions and requirements described in subsection (b), except 
that paragraph (3) of such subsection shall not apply for purposes 
of this subsection. 

(d) Improving Services for Pregnant Women Who Are Vic- 
tims of Domestic Violence, Sexual Violence, Sexual Assault, 
and Stalking. — 

(1) In general. — A State may use amounts received under 
a grant under section 10212 to make funding available tp its 
State Attorney General to assist Statewide offices in pro- 
viding — 

(A) intervention services, accompaniment, and sup- 
portive social services for eligible pregnant women who are 
victims of domestic violence, sexual violence, sexual as- 
sault, or stalking. 

(B) technical assistance and training (as described in 
subsection (c)) relating to violence against eligible preg- 
nant women to be made available to the following: 

(i) Federal, State, tribal, territorial, and local gov- 
ernments, law enforcement agencies, and courts. 

(ii) Professionals working in legal, social service, 
and health care settings. 

(iii) Nonprofit organizations. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10214 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



856 



(iv) Faith-based organizations. 

(2) Eligibility. — To be eligible for a grant under para- 
graph (1), a State Attorney General shall submit an applica- 
tion to the designated State agency at such time, in such man- 
ner, and containing such information, as specified by the State. 

(3) Technical assistance and training described. — For 
purposes of paragraph (1)(B), technical assistance and training 
is — 

(A) the identification of eligible pregnant women expe- 
riencing domestic violence, sexual violence, sexual assault, 
or stalking; 

(B) the assessment of the immediate and short-term 
safety of such a pregnant woman, the evaluation of the im- 
pact of the violence or stalking on the pregnant woman's 
health, and the assistance of the pregnant woman in de- 
veloping a plan aimed at preventing further domestic vio- 
lence, sexual violence, sexual assault, or stalking, as ap- 
propriate; 

(C) the maintenance of complete medical or forensic 
records that include the documentation of any examina- 
tion, treatment given, and referrals made, recording the lo- 
cation and nature of the pregnant woman's injuries, and 
the establishment of mechanisms to ensure the privacy 
and confidentiality of those medical records; and 

(D) the identification and referral of the pregnant 
woman to appropriate public and private nonprofit entities 
that provide intervention services, accompaniment, and 
supportive social services. 

(4) Eligible pregnant woman. — In this subsection, the 
term "eligible pregnant woman" means any woman who is 
pregnant on the date on which such woman becomes a victim 
of domestic violence, sexual violence, sexual assault, or stalk- 
ing or who was pregnant during the one-year period before 
such date. 

(e) Public Awareness and Education.— A State may use 
amounts received under a grant under section 10212 to make fund- 
ing available to increase public awareness and education con- 
cerning any services available to pregnant and parenting teens and 
women under this part, or any other resources available to preg- 
nant and parenting women in keeping with the intent and pur- 
poses of this part. The State shall be responsible for setting guide- 
lines or limits as to how much of funding may be utilized for public 
awareness and education in any funding award. 

SEC. 10214 [42 U.S.C. 18204]. APPROPRIATIONS. 

There is authorized to be appropriated, and there are appro- 
priated, $25,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2019, to 
carry out this part. 



857 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10221 



PART 3— INDIAN HEALTH CARE 
IMPROVEMENT 

SEC. 10221. INDIAN HEALTH CARE IMPROVEMENT. 

(a) In General. — Except as provided in subsection (b), S. 1790 
entitled "A bill to amend the Indian Health Care Improvement Act 
to revise and extend that Act, and for other purposes.", as reported 
by the Committee on Indian Affairs of the Senate in December 
2009, is enacted into law. \_The bill, as enacted and amended by 
subsection (b), is shown in a separate compiled document.] 

(b) Amendments. — [Amendments below are incorporated into 
the separate compiled document. ] 

(1) Section 119 of the Indian Health Care Improvement 
Act (as amended by section 111 of the bill referred to in sub- 
section (a)) is amended — 

(A) in subsection (d) — 

(i) in paragraph (2), by striking "In establishing" 
and inserting "Subject to paragraphs (3) and (4), in es- 
tablishing"; and 

(ii) by adding at the end the following: 

"(3) Election of Indian tribe or tribal organization. — 
"(A) In general. — Subparagraph (B) of paragraph (2) 
shall not apply in the case of an election made by an In- 
dian tribe or tribal organization located in a State (other 
than Alaska) in which the use of dental health aide thera- 
pist services or midlevel dental health provider services is 
authorized under State law to supply such services in ac- 
cordance with State law. 

"(B) Action by secretary. — On an election by an In- 
dian tribe or tribal organization under subparagraph (A), 
the Secretary, acting through the Service, shall facilitate 
implementation of the services elected. 
"(4) Vacancies. — The Secretary shall not fill any vacancy 

for a certified dentist in a program operated by the Service 

with a dental health aide therapist."; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following: 

"(e) Effect of Section. — Nothing in this section shall restrict 
the ability of the Service, an Indian tribe, or a tribal organization 
to participate in any program or to provide any service authorized 
by any other Federal law.". 

(2) The Indian Health Care Improvement Act (as amended 
by section 134(b) of the bill referred to in subsection (a)) is 
amended by striking section 125 (relating to treatment of 
scholarships for certain purposes). 

(3) Section 806 of the Indian Health Care Improvement 
Act (25 U.S.C. 1676) is amended— 

(A) by striking "Any limitation" and inserting the fol- 
lowing: 

"(a) HHS Appropriations. — Any limitation"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following: 

"(b) Limitations Pursuant to Other Federal Law. — Any 
limitation pursuant to other Federal laws on the use of Federal 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10301 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



858 



funds appropriated to the Service shall apply with respect to the 
performance or coverage of abortions.". 

(4) The bill referred to in subsection (a) is amended by 
striking section 201. 

Subtitle C — Provisions Relating to Title III 

SEC. 10301. PLANS FOR A VALUE-BASED PURCHASING PROGRAM FOR 
AMBULATORY SURGICAL CENTERS [AMENDMENTS FULLY 
INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) In General. — [Added subsection (f) in section 3006] 

(b) Technical. — [Struck clauses (i) and (ii) of section 
3006(a)(2)(A)] 

SEC. 10302. REVISION TO NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR QUALITY IM- 
PROVEMENT IN HEALTH CARE [AMENDMENTS FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED ABOVE]. 

[Amended 399HH9(a)(2)(B)(iii) of the Public Health Service 
Act, as added by section 3011] 

SEC. 10303. DEVELOPMENT OF OUTCOME MEASURES. 

(a) Development. — [Added subsection (f) to section 931 of the 
Public Health Service Act, as added by section 3013(a)] 

(b) Hospital-acquired Conditions. — [Added subsection (f) to 
section 1890A of the Social Security Act, as added by section 
3014(b) and as amended by section 3013(b)] 

(c) Clinical Practice Guidelines. — Section 304(b) of the 
Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 
(Public Law 110-275) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new paragraph: 

"(4) Identification. — 

"(A) In general. — Following receipt of the report sub- 
mitted under paragraph (2), and not less than every 3 
years thereafter, the Secretary shall contract with the In- 
stitute to employ the results of the study performed under 
paragraph (1) and the best methods identified by the Insti- 
tute for the purpose of identifying existing and new clinical 
practice guidelines that were developed using such best 
methods, including guidelines listed in the National Guide- 
line Clearinghouse. 

"(B) Consultation. — In carrying out the identification 
process under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall allow 
for consultation with professional societies, voluntary 
health care organizations, and expert panels.". 

SEC. 10304. SELECTION OF EFFICIENCY MEASURES [AMENDMENTS 
FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

[Amended sections 1890(b)(7) and 1890A of the Social Security 
Act, as added by section 3014, by striking "quality" each place it ap- 
pears and inserting "quality and efficiency". Because of different 
typefaces, uncertain if amended headings in those sections. ] 

SEC. 10305. DATA COLLECTION; PUBLIC REPORTING [AMENDMENTS 
FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

[Replaced section 39911(a) of the Public Health Service Act, as 
added by section 3015] 

June 9, 2010 



859 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10312 



SEC. 10306. IMPROVEMENTS UNDER THE CENTER FOR MEDICARE AND 
MEDICAID INNOVATION [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCOR- 
PORATED ABOVE]. 

Section 1115A of the Social Security Act, as added by section 
3021, is amended — 

(1) {Inserted new paragraph at end of subsection (a)] 

(2) in subsection (b)(2) — 

(A) [Amended subparagraph (A)] 

(B) [Added clauses (xix) and (xx) at end of subpara- 
graph (B)~\ 

(C) [Added clause (viii) at end of subparagraph (C)] 

(3) [Added subparagraph (C) at the end of subsection 

mm 

(4) [Amended paragraphs (1)(B) and (2) of subsection (c) 
and added paragraph (3) and sentence to subsection (c)] 

SEC. 10307. IMPROVEMENTS TO THE MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS 
PROGRAM [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

[Added new subsections (i) - (k) to section 1899 of the Social 
Security Act, as added by section 30221 

SEC. 10308. REVISIONS TO NATIONAL PILOT PROGRAM ON PAYMENT 
BUNDLING [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) In General. — Section 1866D of the Social Security Act, as 
added by section 3023, is amended — 

(1) [Amended paragraph (a)(2)(B)~\ 

(2) [Replaced subsection (c)(1)(B)] 

(3) [Replaced subsection (g)] 

(b) Technical Amendments. — 

(1) [Amended section 3023] 

(2) [Redesignated section 1866D of the Social Security Act, 
as added by section 3024, as section 1866E] 

SEC. 10309. REVISIONS TO HOSPITAL READMISSIONS REDUCTION 
PROGRAM [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

[Amended section 1886(q)(l) of the Social Security Act, as 
added by section 3025] 

SEC. 10310. REPEAL OF PHYSICIAN PAYMENT UPDATE [AMENDMENTS 
FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

[Repealed section 3101] 

SEC. 10311. REVISIONS TO EXTENSION OF AMBULANCE ADD-ONS 

[AMENDMENTS FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Amended section 1834(l)(13)(A) of the Social Security Act, 
as amended by section 3105(a)] 

(b) [Amended section 146(b)(1) of the Medicare Improvements 
for Patients and Providers Act of 2008, as amended by section 
3105(b)] 

(c) [Amended section 1834(l)(12)(A) of the Social Security Act, 
as amended by section 3105(c)] 

SEC. 10312. CERTAIN PAYMENT RULES FOR LONG-TERM CARE HOS- 
PITAL SERVICES AND MORATORIUM ON THE ESTABLISH- 
MENT OF CERTAIN HOSPITALS AND FACILITIES [AMEND- 
MENTS FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Amended section 114(c) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and 
SCHIP Extension Act of 2007, as amended by section 4302(a) of the 
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act and section 3106(a)] 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10313 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



860 



(b) [Amended section 114(d) of such Act, as amended by section 
3106(b)} 

SEC. 10313. REVISIONS TO THE EXTENSION FOR THE RURAL COMMU- 
NITY HOSPITAL DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM {AMEND- 
MENTS FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Replaced subsection (g) of section 410A of the Medicare 
Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003, as 
added by section 3123(a)} 

(b) [Amended subsection (a)(5) of section 410A of the Medicare 
Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003, as 
amended by section 3123(b)} 

SEC. 10314. ADJUSTMENT TO LOW-VOLUME HOSPITAL PROVISION 

[AMENDMENTS FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

[Amended subparagraphs (C)(i) and (D) of section 1886(d)(12) 
of the Social Security Act, as amended by section 3125} 

SEC. 10315. REVISIONS TO HOME HEALTH CARE PROVISIONS [AMEND- 
MENTS FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Amended section 1895(b)(3)(A)(iii) of the Social Security 
Act, as added by section 3131} 

(b) [Replaced section 3131(d)} 

SEC. 10316. MEDICARE DSH [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCORPORATED 
ABOVE]. 

[Amended section 1886(r)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act, as 
added by section 3133} 

SEC. 10317. REVISIONS TO EXTENSION OF SECTION 508 HOSPITAL 
PROVISIONS [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCORPORATED 
ABOVE]. 

[Replaced section 3137(a)} 

SEC. 10318. REVISIONS TO TRANSITIONAL EXTRA BENEFITS UNDER 
MEDICARE ADVANTAGE [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCOR- 
PORATED ABOVE], 

[Amended section 1853(p)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act, as 
added by section 3201(h); section 3201 and its amendments was 
subsequently repealed by section 1102(a) of HCERA} 

SEC. 10319. REVISIONS TO MARKET BASKET ADJUSTMENTS [AMEND- 
MENTS FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) Inpatient Acute Hospitals. — [Amended section 
1886(b)(3)(B)(xii) of the Social Security Act, as added by section 
3401(a); subsequently amended by section 1105(a) of HCERA} 

(b) Long-term Care Hospitals. — [Amended section 
1886(m)(4) of the Social Security Act, as added by section 3401(c); 
subsequently amended by section 1105(b) of HCERA} 

(c) Inpatient Rehabilitation Facilities. — [Amended section 
1886(j)(3)(D)(i) of SSA, as added by section 3401(d); subsequently 
amended by section 1105(c) of HCERA} 

(d) Home Health Agencies. — [Amended section 
1895(b)(3)(B)(vi)(II) of SSA, as added by section 3401(e)} 

(e) Psychiatric Hospitals— [Amended section 1886(s)(3)(A) of 
SSA, as added by section 3401(f); subsequently amended by section 
1105(d) of HCERA} 

(f) Hospice Care. — [Amended section 1814(i)(l)(C) of the So- 
cial Security Act, as amended by section 3401(g)} 

June 9, 2010 



861 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10322 



(g) Outpatient Hospitals. — [Amended section 1833(t)(3)(G)(i) 
of SSA, as added by section 3401(i); subsequently amended by sec- 
tion 1105(e) of HCERA] 

SEC. 10320. EXPANSION OF THE SCOPE OF, AND ADDITIONAL IM- 
PROVEMENTS TO, THE INDEPENDENT MEDICARE ADVI- 
SORY BOARD. 

(a) In General. — Section 1899A of the Social Security Act, as 
added by section 3403, is amended — 

(1) in subsection (c) — 

(A) [Added sentence at end of paragraph (1)(B)~\; 

(B) [Amended paragraph (2) (A) in clause (iv) and by 
adding new clause (vii)~\ 

(C) [Added clause (vii) to paragraph (2)(B)~\ 

(D) [Amended paragraph (3), including striking sub- 
paragraph (A)(ii)(III)~\ 

(E) [Amended paragraph (4)~\ 

(F) [Amended paragraph (5)1 

(G) [Amended paragraph (6)(B)(i)~\ 

(2) [Amended subsection (d)~\ 

(3) in subsection (e) — 

(A) [Amended paragraph (1)~\ 

(B) [Amended paragraph (3), including adding a new 
subparagraph (B)~\ 

(4) [Amended subsection (f)(3)(B)~\ 

(5) [Added subsections (n) and (o)~\ 

(b) Name Change. — Any reference in the provisions of, or 
amendments made by, section 3403 to the "Independent Medicare 
Advisory Board" shall be deemed to be a reference to the "Inde- 
pendent Payment Advisory Board". 

(c) Rule of Construction. — Nothing in the amendments 
made by this section shall preclude the Independent Medicare Ad- 
visory Board, as established under section 1899A of the Social Se- 
curity Act (as added by section 3403), from solely using data from 
public or private sources to carry out the amendments made by 
subsection (a)(4). 

SEC. 10321. REVISION TO COMMUNITY HEALTH TEAMS [AMENDMENTS 
FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

[Amended section 3502(c)(2)(A)1 
SEC. 10322. QUALITY REPORTING FOR PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS. 

(a) In General. — Section 1886(s) of the Social Security Act, as 
added by section 3401(f), is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new paragraph: 

"(4) Quality reporting. — 

"(A) Reduction in update for failure to report. — 
"(i) In general. — Under the system described in 
paragraph (1), for rate year 2014 and each subsequent 
rate year, in the case of a psychiatric hospital or psy- 
chiatric unit that does not submit data to the Sec- 
retary in accordance with subparagraph (C) with re- 
spect to such a rate year, any annual update to a 
standard Federal rate for discharges for the hospital 
during the rate year, and after application of para- 
graph (2), shall be reduced by 2 percentage points. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10322 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



862 



"(ii) Special rule. — The application of this sub- 
paragraph may result in such annual update being 
less than 0.0 for a rate year, and may result in pay- 
ment rates under the system described in paragraph 
(1) for a rate year being less than such payment rates 
for the preceding rate year. 

"(B) Noncumulative application. — Any reduction 
under subparagraph (A) shall apply only with respect to 
the rate year involved and the Secretary shall not take 
into account such reduction in computing the payment 
amount under the system described in paragraph (1) for a 
subsequent rate year. 

"(C) Submission of quality data. — For rate year 
2014 and each subsequent rate year, each psychiatric hos- 
pital and psychiatric unit shall submit to the Secretary 
data on quality measures specified under subparagraph 
(D). Such data shall be submitted in a form and manner, 
and at a time, specified by the Secretary for purposes of 
this subparagraph. 

"(D) Quality measures. — 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), any meas- 
ure specified by the Secretary under this subpara- 
graph must have been endorsed by the entity with a 
contract under section 1890(a). 

"(ii) Exception. — In the case of a specified area or 
medical topic determined appropriate by the Secretary 
for which a feasible and practical measure has not 
been endorsed by the entity with a contract under sec- 
tion 1890(a), the Secretary may specify a measure that 
is not so endorsed as long as due consideration is 
given to measures that have been endorsed or adopted 
by a consensus organization identified by the Sec- 
retary. 

"(hi) Time frame. — Not later than October 1, 
2012, the Secretary shall publish the measures se- 
lected under this subparagraph that will be applicable 
with respect to rate year 2014. 

"(E) Public availability of data submitted. — The 
Secretary shall establish procedures for making data sub- 
mitted under subparagraph (C) available to the public. 
Such procedures shall ensure that a psychiatric hospital 
and a psychiatric unit has the opportunity to review the 
data that is to be made public with respect to the hospital 
or unit prior to such data being made public. The Sec- 
retary shall report quality measures that relate to services 
furnished in inpatient settings in psychiatric hospitals and 
psychiatric units on the Internet website of the Centers for 
Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services.", 
(b) [Amended section 1890(b)(7)(B)(i)(I) of the Social Security 
Act, as added by section 3014~\ 



863 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 10323U881A SSA 



SEC. 10323. MEDICARE COVERAGE FOR INDIVIDUALS EXPOSED TO EN- 
VIRONMENTAL HEALTH HAZARDS. 

(a) In General.— Title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 1881 the 
following new section: 

"SEC. 1881A [42 U.S.C. 1395rr-l]. MEDICARE COVERAGE FOR INDP7ID- 
UALS EXPOSED TO ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH HAZARDS. 

"(a) Deeming of Individuals as Eligible for Medicare Ben- 
efits. — 

"(1) In general. — For purposes of eligibility for benefits 
under this title, an individual determined under subsection (c) 
to be an environmental exposure affected individual described 
in subsection (e)(2) shall be deemed to meet the conditions 
specified in section 226(a). 

"(2) Discretionary deeming. — For purposes of eligibility 
for benefits under this title, the Secretary may deem an indi- 
vidual determined under subsection (c) to be an environmental 
exposure affected individual described in subsection (e)(3) to 
meet the conditions specified in section 226(a). 

"(3) Effective date of coverage. — An Individual who is 
deemed eligible for benefits under this title under paragraph 
(1) or (2) shall be— 

"(A) entitled to benefits under the program under Part 
A as of the date of such deeming; and 

"(B) eligible to enroll in the program under Part B be- 
ginning with the month in which such deeming occurs. 
"(b) Pilot Program for Care of Certain Individuals Resid- 
ing in Emergency Declaration Areas. — 
"(1) Program; purpose. — 

"(A) Primary pilot program. — The Secretary shall es- 
tablish a pilot program in accordance with this subsection 
to provide innovative approaches to furnishing comprehen- 
sive, coordinated, and cost-effective care under this title to 
individuals described in paragraph (2)(A). 

"(B) Optional pilot programs. — The Secretary may 
establish a separate pilot program, in accordance with this 
subsection, with respect to each geographic area subject to 
an emergency declaration (other than the declaration of 
June 17, 2009), in order to furnish such comprehensive, co- 
ordinated and cost-effective care to individuals described 
in subparagraph (2)(B) who reside in each such area. 
"(2) Individual described. — For purposes of paragraph 
(1), an individual described in this paragraph is an individual 
who enrolls in part B, submits to the Secretary an application 
to participate in the applicable pilot program under this sub- 
section, and — 

"(A) is an environmental exposure affected individual 
described in subsection (e)(2) who resides in or around the 
geographic area subject to an emergency declaration made 
as of June 17, 2009; or 

"(B) is an environmental exposure affected individual 
described in subsection (e)(3) who — 

"(i) is deemed under subsection (a)(2); and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10323M881A SSA PPACA (Consolidated) 



864 



"(ii) meets such other criteria or conditions for 
participation in a pilot program under paragraph 
(1)(B) as the Secretary specifies. 
"(3) Flexible benefits and services. — A pilot program 
under this subsection may provide for the furnishing of bene- 
fits, items, or services not otherwise covered or authorized 
under this title, if the Secretary determines that furnishing 
such benefits, items, or services will further the purposes of 
such pilot program (as described in paragraph (1)). 

"(4) Innovative reimbursement methodologies. — For 
purposes of the pilot program under this subsection, the Sec- 
retary — 

"(A) shall develop and implement appropriate meth- 
odologies to reimburse providers for furnishing benefits, 
items, or services for which payment is not otherwise cov- 
ered or authorized under this title, if such benefits, items, 
or services are furnished pursuant to paragraph (3); and 

"(B) may develop and implement innovative ap- 
proaches to reimbursing providers for any benefits, items, 
or services furnished under this subsection. 
"(5) Limitation. — Consistent with section 1862(b), no pay- 
ment shall be made under the pilot program under this sub- 
section with respect to benefits, items, or services furnished to 
an environmental exposure affected individual (as defined in 
subsection (e)) to the extent that such individual is eligible to 
receive such benefits, items, or services through any other pub- 
lic or private benefits plan or legal agreement. 

"(6) Waiver authority. — The Secretary may waive such 
provisions of this title and title XI as are necessary to carry 
out pilot programs under this subsection. 

"(7) Funding. — For purposes of carrying out pilot pro- 
grams under this subsection, the Secretary shall provide for 
the transfer, from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund 
under section 1817 and the Federal Supplementary Medical In- 
surance Trust Fund under section 1841, in such proportion as 
the Secretary determines appropriate, of such sums as the Sec- 
retary determines necessary, to the Centers for Medicare &amp; 
Medicaid Services Program Management Account. 

"(8) Waiver of budget neutrality. — The Secretary shall 
not require that pilot programs under this subsection be budg- 
et neutral with respect to expenditures under this title. 
"(c) Determinations. — 

"(1) By the commissioner of social security. — For pur- 
poses of this section, the Commissioner of Social Security, in 
consultation with the Secretary, and using the cost allocation 
method prescribed in section 201(g), shall determine whether 
individuals are environmental exposure affected individuals. 

"(2) By the secretary. — The Secretary shall determine 
eligibility for pilot programs under subsection (b). 
"(d) Emergency Declaration Defined. — For purposes of this 
section, the term 'emergency declaration' means a declaration of a 
public health emergency under section 104(a) of the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980. 

June 9, 2010 



865 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 10323U881A SSA 



"(e) Environmental Exposure Affected Individual De- 
fined. — 

"(1) In general. — For purposes of this section, the term 
'environmental exposure affected individual' means — 

"(A) an individual described in paragraph (2); and 
"(B) an individual described in paragraph (3). 
"(2) Individual described. — 

"(A) In general. — An individual described in this 
paragraph is any individual who — 

"(i) is diagnosed with 1 or more conditions de- 
scribed in subparagraph (B); 

"(ii) as demonstrated in such manner as the Sec- 
retary determines appropriate, has been present for an 
aggregate total of 6 months in the geographic area 
subject to an emergency declaration specified in sub- 
section (b)(2)(A), during a period ending — 

"(I) not less than 10 years prior to such diag- 
nosis; and 

"(II) prior to the implementation of all the re- 
medial and removal actions specified in the 
Record of Decision for Operating Unit 4 and the 
Record of Decision for Operating Unit 7; 
"(hi) files an application for benefits under this 
title (or has an application filed on behalf of the indi- 
vidual), including pursuant to this section; and 

"(iv) is determined under this section to meet the 
criteria in this subparagraph. 

"(B) Conditions described. — For purposes of sub- 
paragraph (A), the following conditions are described in 
this subparagraph: 

"(i) Asbestosis, pleural thickening, or pleural 
plaques as established by — 

"(I) interpretation by a 'B Reader' qualified 
physician of a plain chest x-ray or interpretation 
of a computed tomographic radiograph of the chest 
by a qualified physician, as determined by the 
Secretary; or 

"(II) such other diagnostic standards as the 
Secretary specifies, 
except that this clause shall not apply to pleural thick- 
ening or pleural plaques unless there are symptoms or 
conditions requiring medical treatment as a result of 
these diagnoses. 

"(ii) Mesothelioma, or malignancies of the lung, 
colon, rectum, larynx, stomach, esophagus, pharynx, or 
ovary, as established by — 

"(I) pathologic examination of biopsy tissue; 
"(II) cytology from bronchioalveolar lavage; or 
"(III) such other diagnostic standards as the 
Secretary specifies. 

"(hi) Any other diagnosis which the Secretary, in 
consultation with the Commissioner of Social Security, 
determines is an asbestos-related medical condition, as 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10323 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



866 



established by such diagnostic standards as the Sec- 
retary specifies. 
"(3) Other individual described. — An individual de- 
scribed in this paragraph is any individual who — 

"(A) is not an individual described in paragraph (2); 

"(B) is diagnosed with a medical condition caused by 
the exposure of the individual to a public health hazard to 
which an emergency declaration applies, based on such 
medical conditions, diagnostic standards, and other criteria 
as the Secretary specifies; 

"(C) as demonstrated in such manner as the Secretary 
determines appropriate, has been present for an aggregate 
total of 6 months in the geographic area subject to the 
emergency declaration involved, during a period deter- 
mined appropriate by the Secretary; 

"(D) files an application for benefits under this title (or 
has an application filed on behalf of the individual), includ- 
ing pursuant to this section; and 

"(E) is determined under this section to meet the cri- 
teria in this paragraph.". 

(b) Program for Early Detection of Certain Medical Con- 
ditions Related to Environmental Health Hazards. — Title XX 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397 et seq.), as amended by 
section 5507, is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"SEC. 2009 [42 U.S.C. 1397h]. PROGRAM FOR EARLY DETECTION OF 

CERTAIN MEDICAL conditions related to environ- 
mental health hazards. 

"(a) Program Establishment. — The Secretary shall establish 
a program in accordance with this section to make competitive 
grants to eligible entities specified in subsection (b) for the purpose 
of— 

"(1) screening at-risk individuals (as defined in subsection 

(c) (1)) for environmental health conditions (as denned in sub- 
section (c)(3)); and 

"(2) developing and disseminating public information and 
education concerning — 

"(A) the availability of screening under the program 
under this section; 

"(B) the detection, prevention, and treatment of envi- 
ronmental health conditions; and 

"(C) the availability of Medicare benefits for certain in- 
dividuals diagnosed with environmental health conditions 
under section 188 1A. 
"(b) Eligible Entities. — 

"(1) In general. — For purposes of this section, an eligible 
entity is an entity described in paragraph (2) which submits an 
application to the Secretary in such form and manner, and con- 
taining such information and assurances, as the Secretary de- 
termines appropriate. 

"(2) Types of eligible entities. — The entities described 
in this paragraph are the following: 

"(A) A hospital or community health center. 
"(B) A Federally qualified health center. 
"(C) A facility of the Indian Health Service. 

June 9, 2010 



867 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10323X2009 SSA 



"(D) A National Cancer Institute-designated cancer 
center. 

"(E) An agency of any State or local government. 
"(F) A nonprofit organization. 

"(G) Any other entity the Secretary determines appro- 
priate. 

"(c) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(1) At-risk individual. — The term 'at-risk individual' 
means an individual who — 

"(A)(i) as demonstrated in such manner as the Sec- 
retary determines appropriate, has been present for an ag- 
gregate total of 6 months in the geographic area subject to 
an emergency declaration specified under paragraph (2), 
during a period ending — 

"(I) not less than 10 years prior to the date of such 
individual's application under subparagraph (B); and 

"(II) prior to the implementation of all the reme- 
dial and removal actions specified in the Record of De- 
cision for Operating Unit 4 and the Record of Decision 
for Operating Unit 7; or 

"(ii) meets such other criteria as the Secretary deter- 
mines appropriate considering the type of environmental 
health condition at issue; and 

"(B) has submitted an application (or has an applica- 
tion submitted on the individual's behalf), to an eligible en- 
tity receiving a grant under this section, for screening 
under the program under this section. 
"(2) Emergency declaration. — The term 'emergency dec- 
laration' means a declaration of a public health emergency 
under section 104(a) of the Comprehensive Environmental Re- 
sponse, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980. 

"(3) Environmental health condition. — The term 'envi- 
ronmental health condition' means — 

"(A) asbestosis, pleural thickening, or pleural plaques, 
as established by — 

"(i) interpretation by a 'B Reader' qualified physi- 
cian of a plain chest x-ray or interpretation of a com- 
puted tomographic radiograph of the chest by a quali- 
fied physician, as determined by the Secretary; or 

"(ii) such other diagnostic standards as the Sec- 
retary specifies; 

"(B) mesothelioma, or malignancies of the lung, colon, 
rectum, larynx, stomach, esophagus, pharynx, or ovary, as 
established by — 

"(i) pathologic examination of biopsy tissue; 
"(ii) cytology from bronchioalveolar lavage; or 
"(hi) such other diagnostic standards as the Sec- 
retary specifies; and 

"(C) any other medical condition which the Secretary 
determines is caused by exposure to a hazardous sub- 
stance or pollutant or contaminant at a Superfund site to 
which an emergency declaration applies, based on such cri- 
teria and as established by such diagnostic standards as 
the Secretary specifies. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10324 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



868 



"(4) Hazardous substance; pollutant; contaminant. — 
The terms 'hazardous substance', 'pollutant', and 'contaminant' 
have the meanings given those terms in section 101 of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601). 

"(5) Superfund site. — The term 'Superfund site' means a 
site included on the National Priorities List developed by the 
President in accordance with section 105(a)(8)(B) of the Com- 
prehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Li- 
ability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9605(a)(8)(B)). 
"(d) Health Coverage Unaffected. — Nothing in this section 
shall be construed to affect any coverage obligation of a govern- 
mental or private health plan or program relating to an at-risk in- 
dividual. 

"(e) Funding. — 

"(1) In general. — Out of any funds in the Treasury not 
otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated to the Sec- 
retary, to carry out the program under this section — 

"(A) $23,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2010 
through 2014; and 

"(B) $20,000,000 for each 5-fiscal year period there- 
after. 

"(2) Availability. — Funds appropriated under paragraph 
(1) shall remain available until expended. 

"(f) NONAPPLICATION. — 

"(1) In general. — Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
preceding sections of this title shall not apply to grants award- 
ed under this section. 

"(2) Limitations on use of grants. — Section 2005(a) shall 
apply to a grant awarded under this section to the same extent 
and in the same manner as such section applies to payments 
to States under this title, except that paragraph (4) of such 
section shall not be construed to prohibit grantees from con- 
ducting screening for environmental health conditions as au- 
thorized under this section.". 

SEC. 10324. PROTECTIONS FOR FRONTIER STATES. 

(a) Floor on Area Wage Index for Hospitals in Frontier 
Staters 

(1) In general.— Section 1886(d)(3)(E) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(3)(E)) is amended— 

(A) in clause (i), by striking "clause (ii)" and inserting 
"clause (ii) or (hi)"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new clause: 
"(hi) Floor on area wage index for hospitals 

in frontier states. — 

"(I) In general. — Subject to subclause (IV), 
for discharges occurring on or after October 1, 
2010, the area wage index applicable under this 
subparagraph to any hospital which is located in 
a frontier State (as defined in subclause (II)) may 
not be less than 1.00. 

"(II) Frontier state defined. — In this 
clause, the term 'frontier State' means a State in 

June 9, 2010 



869 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10324 



which at least 50 percent of the counties in the 
State are frontier counties. 

"(Ill) Frontier county defined. — In this 
clause, the term 'frontier county' means a county 
in which the population per square mile is less 
than 6. 

"(IV) Limitation. — This clause shall not apply 
to any hospital located in a State that receives a 
non-labor related share adjustment under para- 
graph (5)(H).". 

(2) Waiving budget neutrality. — Section 1886(d)(3)(E) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(3)(E)), as amend- 
ed by subsection (a), is amended in the third sentence by in- 
serting "and the amendments made by section 10324(a)(1) of 
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" after "2003". 

(b) Floor on Area Wage Adjustment Factor for Hospital 
Outpatient Department Services in Frontier States. — Section 
1833(t) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 13951(f)), as amended 
by section 3138, is amended — 

(1) in paragraph (2)(D), by striking "the Secretary" and in- 
serting "subject to paragraph (19), the Secretary"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 
"(19) Floor on area wage adjustment factor for hos- 
pital outpatient department services in frontier 

STATES. — 

"(A) In general. — Subject to subparagraph (B), with 
respect to covered OPD services furnished on or after Jan- 
uary 1, 2011, the area wage adjustment factor applicable 
under the payment system established under this sub- 
section to any hospital outpatient department which is lo- 
cated in a frontier State (as denned in section 
1886(d)(3)(E)(iii)(II)) may not be less than 1.00. The pre- 
ceding sentence shall not be applied in a budget neutral 
manner. 

"(B) Limitation. — This paragraph shall not apply to 
any hospital outpatient department located in a State that 
receives a non-labor related share adjustment under sec- 
tion 1886(d)(5)(H).". 

(c) Floor for Practice Expense Index for Physicians' 
Services Furnished in Frontier States. — Section 1848(e)(1) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(eXD), as amended by 
section 3102, is amended — 

(1) in subparagraph (A), by striking "and (H)" and insert- 
ing "(H), and (I)"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: 

"(I) Floor for practice expense index for services 
furnished in frontier states. — 

"(i) In general. — Subject to clause (ii), for pur- 
poses of payment for services furnished in a frontier 
State (as defined in section 1886(d)(3)(E)(iii)(II)) on or 
after January 1, 2011, after calculating the practice 
expense index in subparagraph (A)(i), the Secretary 
shall increase any such index to 1.00 if such index 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10325 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



870 



would otherwise be less that 1.00. The preceding sen- 
tence shall not be applied in a budget neutral manner. 

"(ii) Limitation. — This subparagraph shall not 
apply to services furnished in a State that receives a 
non-labor related share adjustment under section 
1886(d)(5)(H).". 

SEC. 10325. REVISION TO SKILLED NURSING FACILITY PROSPECTIVE 
PAYMENT SYSTEM. 

(a) Temporary Delay of RUG-IV. — Notwithstanding any 
other provision of law, the Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices shall not, prior to October 1, 2011, implement Version 4 of the 
Resource Utilization Groups (in this subsection refereed to as 
"RUG-IV") published in the Federal Register on August 11, 2009, 
entitled "Prospective Payment System and Consolidated Billing for 
Skilled Nursing Facilities for FY 2010; Minimum Data Set, Version 
3.0 for Skilled Nursing Facilities and Medicaid Nursing Facilities" 
(74 Fed. Reg. 40288). Beginning on October 1, 2010, the Secretary 
of Health and Human Services shall implement the change specific 
to therapy furnished on a concurrent basis that is a component of 
RUG-IV and changes to the lookback period to ensure that only 
those services furnished after admission to a skilled nursing facility 
are used as factors in determining a case mix classification under 
the skilled nursing facility prospective payment system under sec- 
tion 1888(e) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395yy(e)). 

(b) Construction. — Nothing in this section shall be inter- 
preted as delaying the implementation of Version 3.0 of the Min- 
imum Data Sets (MDS 3.0) beyond the planned implementation 
date of October 1, 2010. 

SEC. 10326 [42 U.S.C. 1395b-l note]. PILOT TESTING PAY-FOR-PERFORM- 
ANCE PROGRAMS FOR CERTAIN MEDICARE PROVIDERS. 

(a) In General. — Not later than January 1, 2016, the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred to 
as the "Secretary") shall, for each provider described in subsection 
(b), conduct a separate pilot program under title XVIII of the Social 
Security Act to test the implementation of a value-based pur- 
chasing program for payments under such title for the provider. 

(b) Providers Described. — The providers described in this 
paragraph are the following: 

(1) Psychiatric hospitals (as described in clause (i) of sec- 
tion 1886(d)(1)(B) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(l)(B))) and 
psychiatric units (as described in the matter following clause 
(v) of such section). 

(2) Long-term care hospitals (as described in clause (iv) of 
such section). 

(3) Rehabilitation hospitals (as described in clause (ii) of 
such section). 

(4) PPS-exempt cancer hospitals (as described in clause (v) 
of such section). 

(5) Hospice programs (as defined in section 1861(dd)(2) of 
such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(dd)(2))). 

(c) Waiver Authority. — The Secretary may waive such re- 
quirements of titles XI and XVIII of the Social Security Act as may 

June 9, 2010 



871 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10327 



be necessary solely for purposes of carrying out the pilot programs 
under this section. 

(d) No Additional Program Expenditures. — Payments under 
this section under the separate pilot program for value based pur- 
chasing (as described in subsection (a)) for each provider type de- 
scribed in paragraphs (1) through (5) of subsection (b) for applica- 
ble items and services under title XVIII of the Social Security Act 
for a year shall be established in a manner that does not result in 
spending more under each such value based purchasing program 
for such year than would otherwise be expended for such provider 
type for such year if the pilot program were not implemented, as 
estimated by the Secretary. 

(e) Expansion of Pilot Program. — The Secretary may, at any 
point after January 1, 2018, expand the duration and scope of a 
pilot program conducted under this subsection, to the extent deter- 
mined appropriate by the Secretary, if — 

(1) the Secretary determines that such expansion is ex- 
pected to — 

(A) reduce spending under title XVIII of the Social Se- 
curity Act without reducing the quality of care; or 

(B) improve the quality of care and reduce spending; 

(2) the Chief Actuary of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Med- 
icaid Services certifies that such expansion would reduce pro- 
gram spending under such title XVIII; and 

(3) the Secretary determines that such expansion would 
not deny or limit the coverage or provision of benefits under 
such title XIII for Medicare beneficiaries. 

SEC. 10327. IMPROVEMENTS TO THE PHYSICIAN QUALITY REPORTING 
SYSTEM. 

(a) In General. — Section 1848(m) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(m)) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing new paragraph: 

"(7) Additional incentive payment. — 

"(A) In general. — For 2011 through 2014, if an eligi- 
ble professional meets the requirements described in sub- 
paragraph (B), the applicable quality percent for such 
year, as described in clauses (iii) and (iv) of paragraph 
(1)(B), shall be increased by 0.5 percentage points. 

"(B) Requirements described. — In order to qualify 
for the additional incentive payment described in subpara- 
graph (A), an eligible professional shall meet the following 
requirements: 

"(i) The eligible professional shall — 

"(I) satisfactorily submit data on quality 
measures for purposes of paragraph (1) for a year; 
and 

"(II) have such data submitted on their behalf 
through a Maintenance of Certification Program 
(as defined in subparagraph (C)(i)) that meets — 

"(aa) the criteria for a registry (as de- 
scribed in subsection (k)(4)); or 

"(bb) an alternative form and manner de- 
termined appropriate by the Secretary. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10327 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



872 



"(ii) The eligible professional, more frequently 
than is required to qualify for or maintain board cer- 
tification status — 

"(I) participates in such a Maintenance of Cer- 
tification program for a year; and 

"(II) successfully completes a qualified Main- 
tenance of Certification Program practice assess- 
ment (as defined in subparagraph (C)(ii)) for such 
year. 

"(hi) A Maintenance of Certification program sub- 
mits to the Secretary, on behalf of the eligible profes- 
sional, information — 

"(I) in a form and manner specified by the 
Secretary, that the eligible professional has suc- 
cessfully met the requirements of clause (ii) 
(which may be in the form of a structural meas- 
ure); 

"(II) if requested by the Secretary, on the sur- 
vey of patient experience with care (as described 
in subparagraph (C)(ii)(II)); and 

"(III) as the Secretary may require, on the 
methods, measures, and data used under the 
Maintenance of Certification Program and the 
qualified Maintenance of Certification Program 
practice assessment. 
"(C) Definitions. — For purposes of this paragraph: 

"(i) The term 'Maintenance of Certification Pro- 
gram' means a continuous assessment program, such 
as qualified American Board of Medical Specialties 
Maintenance of Certification program or an equivalent 
program (as determined by the Secretary), that ad- 
vances quality and the lifelong learning and self-as- 
sessment of board certified specialty physicians by fo- 
cusing on the competencies of patient care, medical 
knowledge, practice-based learning, interpersonal and 
communication skills and professionalism. Such a pro- 
gram shall include the following: 

"(I) The program requires the physician to 
maintain a valid, unrestricted medical license in 
the United States. 

"(II) The program requires a physician to par- 
ticipate in educational and self-assessment pro- 
grams that require an assessment of what was 
learned. 

"(Ill) The program requires a physician to 
demonstrate, through a formalized, secure exam- 
ination, that the physician has the fundamental 
diagnostic skills, medical knowledge, and clinical 
judgment to provide quality care in their respec- 
tive specialty. 

"(IV) The program requires successful comple- 
tion of a qualified Maintenance of Certification 
Program practice assessment as described in 
clause (ii). 

June 9, 2010 



873 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10328 



"(ii) The term 'qualified Maintenance of Certifi- 
cation Program practice assessment' means an assess- 
ment of a physician's practice that — 

"(I) includes an initial assessment of an eligi- 
ble professional's practice that is designed to dem- 
onstrate the physician's use of evidence-based 
medicine; 

"(II) includes a survey of patient experience 
with care; and 

"(III) requires a physician to implement a 
quality improvement intervention to address a 
practice weakness identified in the initial assess- 
ment under subclause (I) and then to remeasure 
to assess performance improvement after such 
intervention.". 

(b) [Added a paragraph (3) to section 3002(c)~\ 

(c) Elimination of MA Regional Plan Stabilization 
Fund. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1858 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-27a) is amended by striking subsection (e). 

(2) Transition. — Any amount contained in the MA Re- 
gional Plan Stabilization Fund as of the date of the enactment 
of this Act shall be transferred to the Federal Supplementary 
Medical Insurance Trust Fund. 

SEC. 10328. IMPROVEMENT IN PART D MEDICATION THERAPY MAN- 
AGEMENT (MTM) PROGRAMS. 

(a) In General. — Section 1860D-4(c)(2) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-104(c)(2)) is amended— 

(1) by redesignating subparagraphs (C), (D), and (E) as 
subparagraphs (E), (F), and (G), respectively; and 

(2) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following new 
subparagraphs: 

"(C) Required interventions. — For plan years begin- 
ning on or after the date that is 2 years after the date of 
the enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act, prescription drug plan sponsors shall offer medi- 
cation therapy management services to targeted bene- 
ficiaries described in subparagraph (A)(ii) that include, at 
a minimum, the following to increase adherence to pre- 
scription medications or other goals deemed necessary by 
the Secretary: 

"(i) An annual comprehensive medication review 
furnished person-to-person or using telehealth tech- 
nologies (as defined by the Secretary) by a licensed 
pharmacist or other qualified provider. The com- 
prehensive medication review — 

"(I) shall include a review of the individual's 
medications and may result in the creation of a 
recommended medication action plan or other ac- 
tions in consultation with the individual and with 
input from the prescriber to the extent necessary 
and practicable; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10329 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



874 



"(II) shall include providing the individual 
with a written or printed summary of the results 
of the review. 

The Secretary, in consultation with relevant stake- 
holders, shall develop a standardized format for the 
action plan under subclause (I) and the summary 
under subclause (II). 

"(ii) Follow-up interventions as warranted based 
on the findings of the annual medication review or the 
targeted medication enrollment and which may be pro- 
vided person-to-person or using telehealth technologies 
(as defined by the Secretary). 

"(D) Assessment. — The prescription drug plan sponsor 
shall have in place a process to assess, at least on a quar- 
terly basis, the medication use of individuals who are at 
risk but not enrolled in the medication therapy manage- 
ment program, including individuals who have experienced 
a transition in care, if the prescription drug plan sponsor 
has access to that information. 

"(E) Automatic enrollment with ability to opt- 
out. — The prescription drug plan sponsor shall have in 
place a process to — 

"(i) subject to clause (ii), automatically enroll tar- 
geted beneficiaries described in subparagraph (A)(ii), 
including beneficiaries identified under subparagraph 
(D), in the medication therapy management program 
required under this subsection; and 

"(ii) permit such beneficiaries to opt-out of enroll- 
ment in such program.", 
(b) Rule of Construction. — Nothing in this section shall 
limit the authority of the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
to modify or broaden requirements for a medication therapy man- 
agement program under part D of title XVIII of the Social Security 
Act or to study new models for medication therapy management 
through the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation under 
section 1115A of such Act, as added by section 3021. 

SEC. 10329. DEVELOPING METHODOLOGY TO ASSESS HEALTH PLAN 
VALUE. 

(a) Development. — The Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices (referred to in this section as the "Secretary"), in consultation 
with relevant stakeholders including health insurance issuers, 
health care consumers, employers, health care providers, and other 
entities determined appropriate by the Secretary, shall develop a 
methodology to measure health plan value. Such methodology shall 
take into consideration, where applicable — 

(1) the overall cost to enrollees under the plan; 

(2) the quality of the care provided for under the plan; 

(3) the efficiency of the plan in providing care; 

(4) the relative risk of the plan's enrollees as compared to 
other plans; 

(5) the actuarial value or other comparative measure of the 
benefits covered under the plan; and 

(6) other factors determined relevant by the Secretary. 

June 9, 2010 



875 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10331 



(b) Report. — Not later than 18 months after the date of enact- 
ment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report 
concerning the methodology developed under subsection (a). 

SEC. 10330. MODERNIZING COMPUTER AND DATA SYSTEMS OF THE 
CENTERS FOR MEDICARE &amp; MEDICAID SERVICES TO SUP- 
PORT IMPROVEMENTS IN CARE DELD7ERY. 

(a) In General. — The Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices (in this section referred to as the "Secretary") shall develop a 
plan (and detailed budget for the resources needed to implement 
such plan) to modernize the computer and data systems of the Cen- 
ters for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services (in this section referred to 
as "CMS"). 

(b) Considerations. — In developing the plan, the Secretary 
shall consider how such modernized computer system could — 

(1) in accordance with the regulations promulgated under 
section 264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and Account- 
ability Act of 1996, make available data in a reliable and time- 
ly manner to providers of services and suppliers to support 
their efforts to better manage and coordinate care furnished to 
beneficiaries of CMS programs; and 

(2) support consistent evaluations of payment and delivery 
system reforms under CMS programs. 

(c) Posting of Plan. — By not later than 9 months after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall post on the 
website of the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services the plan 
described in subsection (a). 

SEC. 10331 [42 U.S.C. 1395w-5 note]. PUBLIC REPORTING OF PERFORM- 
ANCE INFORMATION. 

(a) In General. — 

(1) Development. — Not later than January 1, 2011, the 
Secretary shall develop a Physician Compare Internet website 
with information on physicians enrolled in the Medicare pro- 
gram under section 1866(j) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395cc(j)) and other eligible professionals who partici- 
pate in the Physician Quality Reporting Initiative under sec- 
tion 1848 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4). 

(2) Plan. — Not later than January 1, 2013, and with re- 
spect to reporting periods that begin no earlier than January 
1, 2012, the Secretary shall also implement a plan for making 
publicly available through Physician Compare, consistent with 
subsection (c), information on physician performance that pro- 
vides comparable information for the public on quality and pa- 
tient experience measures with respect to physicians enrolled 
in the Medicare program under such section 1866(j). To the ex- 
tent scientifically sound measures that are developed con- 
sistent with the requirements of this section are available, 
such information, to the extent practicable, shall include — 

(A) measures collected under the Physician Quality 
Reporting Initiative; 

(B) an assessment of patient health outcomes and the 
functional status of patients; 

(C) an assessment of the continuity and coordination 
of care and care transitions, including episodes of care and 
risk-adjusted resource use; 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10331 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



876 



(D) an assessment of efficiency; 

(E) an assessment of patient experience and patient, 
caregiver, and family engagement; 

(F) an assessment of the safety, effectiveness, and 
timeliness of care; and 

(G) other information as determined appropriate by 
the Secretary. 

(b) Other Required Considerations. — In developing and im- 
plementing the plan described in subsection (a)(2), the Secretary 
shall, to the extent practicable, include — 

(1) processes to assure that data made public, either by the 
Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services or by other entities, 
is statistically valid and reliable, including risk adjustment 
mechanisms used by the Secretary; 

(2) processes by which a physician or other eligible profes- 
sional whose performance on measures is being publicly re- 
ported has a reasonable opportunity, as determined by the Sec- 
retary, to review his or her individual results before they are 
made public; 

(3) processes by the Secretary to assure that the imple- 
mentation of the plan and the data made available on Physi- 
cian Compare provide a robust and accurate portrayal of a 
physician's performance; 

(4) data that reflects the care provided to all patients seen 
by physicians, under both the Medicare program and, to the 
extent practicable, other payers, to the extent such information 
would provide a more accurate portrayal of physician perform- 
ance; 

(5) processes to ensure appropriate attribution of care 
when multiple physicians and other providers are involved in 
the care of a patient; 

(6) processes to ensure timely statistical performance feed- 
back is provided to physicians concerning the data reported 
under any program subject to public reporting under this sec- 
tion; and 

(7) implementation of computer and data systems of the 
Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services that support valid, 
reliable, and accurate public reporting activities authorized 
under this section. 

(c) Ensuring Patient Privacy. — The Secretary shall ensure 
that information on physician performance and patient experience 
is not disclosed under this section in a manner that violates sec- 
tions 552 or 552a of title 5, United States Code, with regard to the 
privacy of individually identifiable health information. 

(d) Feedback From Multi-stakeholder Groups. — The Sec- 
retary shall take into consideration input provided by multi-stake- 
holder groups, consistent with sections 1890(b)(7) and 1890A of the 
Social Security Act, as added by section 3014 of this Act, in select- 
ing quality measures for use under this section. 

(e) Consideration of Transition to Value-based Pur- 
chasing. — In developing the plan under this subsection (a)(2), the 
Secretary shall, as the Secretary determines appropriate, consider 
the plan to transition to a value-based purchasing program for phy- 
sicians and other practitioners developed under section 131 of the 

June 9, 2010 



877 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10332 



Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 
(Public Law 110-275). 

(f) Report to Congress. — Not later than January 1, 2015, the 
Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the Physician Com- 
pare Internet website developed under subsection (a)(1). Such re- 
port shall include information on the efforts of and plans made by 
the Secretary to collect and publish data on physician quality and 
efficiency and on patient experience of care in support of value- 
based purchasing and consumer choice, together with recommenda- 
tions for such legislation and administrative action as the Sec- 
retary determines appropriate. 

(g) Expansion. — At any time before the date on which the re- 
port is submitted under subsection (f), the Secretary may expand 
(including expansion to other providers of services and suppliers 
under title XVIII of the Social Security Act) the information made 
available on such website. 

(h) Financial Incentives To Encourage Consumers To 
Choose High Quality Providers. — The Secretary may establish a 
demonstration program, not later than January 1, 2019, to provide 
financial incentives to Medicare beneficiaries who are furnished 
services by high quality physicians, as determined by the Secretary 
based on factors in subparagraphs (A) through (G) of subsection 
(a)(2). In no case may Medicare beneficiaries be required to pay in- 
creased premiums or cost sharing or be subject to a reduction in 
benefits under title XVIII of the Social Security Act as a result of 
such demonstration program. The Secretary shall ensure that any 
such demonstration program does not disadvantage those bene- 
ficiaries without reasonable access to high performing physicians or 
create financial inequities under such title. 

(i) Definitions. — In this section: 

(1) Eligible professional. — The term "eligible profes- 
sional" has the meaning given that term for purposes of the 
Physician Quality Reporting Initiative under section 1848 of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4). 

(2) Physician. — The term "physician" has the meaning 
given that term in section 1861(r) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395x(r)). 

(3) Physician compare. — The term "Physician Compare" 
means the Internet website developed under subsection (a)(1). 

(4) Secretary. — The term "Secretary" means the Sec- 
retary of Health and Human Services. 

sec. 10332. availability of medicare data for performance 
measurement. 

(a) In General. — Section 1874 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395kk) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection: 

"(e) Availability of Medicare Data. — 

"(1) In general. — Subject to paragraph (4), the Secretary 
shall make available to qualified entities (as defined in para- 
graph (2)) data described in paragraph (3) for the evaluation 
of the performance of providers of services and suppliers. 

"(2) Qualified entities. — For purposes of this subsection, 
the term 'qualified entity' means a public or private entity 
that— 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10332 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



878 



"(A) is qualified (as determined by the Secretary) to 
use claims data to evaluate the performance of providers 
of services and suppliers on measures of quality, efficiency, 
effectiveness, and resource use; and 

"(B) agrees to meet the requirements described in 
paragraph (4) and meets such other requirements as the 
Secretary may specify, such as ensuring security of data. 
"(3) Data described. — The data described in this para- 
graph are standardized extracts (as determined by the Sec- 
retary) of claims data under parts A, B, and D for items and 
services furnished under such parts for one or more specified 
geographic areas and time periods requested by a qualified en- 
tity. The Secretary shall take such actions as the Secretary 
deems necessary to protect the identity of individuals entitled 
to or enrolled for benefits under such parts. 
"(4) Requirements. — 

"(A) Fee. — Data described in paragraph (3) shall be 
made available to a qualified entity under this subsection 
at a fee equal to the cost of making such data available. 
Any fee collected pursuant to the preceding sentence shall 
be deposited into the Federal Supplementary Medical In- 
surance Trust Fund under section 1841. 

"(B) Specification of uses and methodologies. — A 
qualified entity requesting data under this subsection 
shall— 

"(i) submit to the Secretary a description of the 
methodologies that such qualified entity will use to 
evaluate the performance of providers of services and 
suppliers using such data; 

"(h)(1) except as provided in subclause (II), if 
available, use standard measures, such as measures 
endorsed by the entity with a contract under section 
1890(a) and measures developed pursuant to section 
931 of the Public Health Service Act; or 

"(II) use alternative measures if the Secretary, in 
consultation with appropriate stakeholders, deter- 
mines that use of such alternative measures would be 
more valid, reliable, responsive to consumer pref- 
erences, cost-effective, or relevant to dimensions of 
quality and resource use not addressed by such stand- 
ard measures; 

"(hi) include data made available under this sub- 
section with claims data from sources other than 
claims data under this title in the evaluation of per- 
formance of providers of services and suppliers; 

"(iv) only include information on the evaluation of 
performance of providers and suppliers in reports de- 
scribed in subparagraph (C); 

"(v) make available to providers of services and 
suppliers, upon their request, data made available 
under this subsection; and 

"(vi) prior to their release, submit to the Secretary 
the format of reports under subparagraph (C). 

June 9, 2010 



879 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 10333V340H PHSA 



"(C) Reports. — Any report by a qualified entity evalu- 
ating the performance of providers of services and sup- 
pliers using data made available under this subsection 
shall— 

"(i) include an understandable description of the 
measures, which shall include quality measures and 
the rationale for use of other measures described in 
subparagraph (B)(ii)(II), risk adjustment methods, 
physician attribution methods, other applicable meth- 
ods, data specifications and limitations, and the spon- 
sors, so that consumers, providers of services and sup- 
pliers, health plans, researchers, and other stake- 
holders can assess such reports; 

"(ii) be made available confidentially, to any pro- 
vider of services or supplier to be identified in such re- 
port, prior to the public release of such report, and 
provide an opportunity to appeal and correct errors; 

"(hi) only include information on a provider of 
services or supplier in an aggregate form as deter- 
mined appropriate by the Secretary; and 

"(iv) except as described in clause (ii), be made 
available to the public. 

"(D) Approval and limitation of uses. — The Sec- 
retary shall not make data described in paragraph (3) 
available to a qualified entity unless the qualified entity 
agrees to release the information on the evaluation of per- 
formance of providers of services and suppliers. Such enti- 
ty shall only use such data, and information derived from 
such evaluation, for the reports under subparagraph (C). 
Data released to a qualified entity under this subsection 
shall not be subject to discovery or admission as evidence 
in judicial or administrative proceedings without consent 
of the applicable provider of services or supplier.", 
(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by subsection (a) 
shall take effect on January 1, 2012. 

SEC. 10333. COMMUNITY-BASED COLLABORATIVE CARE NETWORKS. 

Part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
254b et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subpart: 

"Subpart XI — Community-Based Collaborative 
Care Network Program 

"SEC. 340H [42 U.S.C. 256i]. COMMUNITY-BASED COLLABORATIVE CARE 
NETWORK PROGRAM. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary may award grants to eligible 
entities to support community-based collaborative care networks 
that meet the requirements of subsection (b). 

"(b) Community-based Collaborative Care Networks. — 

"(1) Description. — A community-based collaborative care 
network (referred to in this section as a 'network') shall be a 
consortium of health care providers with a joint governance 
structure (including providers within a single entity) that pro- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10334 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



880 



vides comprehensive coordinated and integrated health care 
services (as defined by the Secretary) for low-income popu- 
lations. 

"(2) Required inclusion. — A network shall include the 
following providers (unless such provider does not exist within 
the community, declines or refuses to participate, or places un- 
reasonable conditions on their participation): 

"(A) A hospital that meets the criteria in section 
1923(b)(1) of the Social Security Act; and 

"(B) All Federally qualified health centers (as defined 
in section 1861(aa) of the Social Security Act located in the 
community. 

"(3) Priority. — In awarding grants, the Secretary shall 
give priority to networks that include — 

"(A) the capability to provide the broadest range of 
services to low-income individuals; 

"(B) the broadest range of providers that currently 
serve a high volume of low-income individuals; and 
"(C) a county or municipal department of health. 
"(c) Application. — 

"(1) Application. — A network described in subsection (b) 
shall submit an application to the Secretary. 

"(2) Renewal. — In subsequent years, based on the per- 
formance of grantees, the Secretary may provide renewal 
grants to prior year grant recipients. 
"(d) Use of Funds. — 

"(1) Use by grantees. — Grant funds may be used for the 
following activities: 

"(A) Assist low-income individuals to — 

"(i) access and appropriately use health services; 
"(ii) enroll in health coverage programs; and 
"(hi) obtain a regular primary care provider or a 
medical home. 

"(B) Provide case management and care management. 
"(C) Perform health outreach using neighborhood 
health workers or through other means. 
"(D) Provide transportation. 

"(E) Expand capacity, including through telehealth, 
after-hours services or urgent care. 

"(F) Provide direct patient care services. 
"(2) Grant funds to hrsa grantees. — The Secretary may 
limit the percent of grant funding that may be spent on direct 
care services provided by grantees of programs administered 
by the Health Resources and Services Administration or im- 
pose other requirements on such grantees deemed necessary. 
"(e) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are author- 
ized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may 
be necessary for each of fiscal years 2011 through 2015.". 

SEC. 10334. MINORITY HEALTH. 

(a) Office of Minority Health. — 

(1) In general. — Section 1707 of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-6) is amended— 

June 9, 2010 



881 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10334 



(A) in subsection (a), by striking "within the Office of 
Public Health and Science" and all that follows through 
the end and inserting ". The Office of Minority Health as 
existing on the date of enactment of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act shall be transferred to the Office 
of the Secretary in such manner that there is established 
in the Office of the Secretary, the Office of Minority 
Health, which shall be headed by the Deputy Assistant 
Secretary for Minority Health who shall report directly to 
the Secretary, and shall retain and strengthen authorities 
(as in existence on such date of enactment) for the purpose 
of improving minority health and the quality of health care 
minorities receive, and eliminating racial and ethnic dis- 
parities. In carrying out this subsection, the Secretary, act- 
ing through the Deputy Assistant Secretary, shall award 
grants, contracts, enter into memoranda of understanding, 
cooperative, interagency, intra-agency and other agree- 
ments with public and nonprofit private entities, agencies, 
as well as Departmental and Cabinet agencies and organi- 
zations, and with organizations that are indigenous human 
resource providers in communities of color to assure im- 
proved health status of racial and ethnic minorities, and 
shall develop measures to evaluate the effectiveness of ac- 
tivities aimed at reducing health disparities and sup- 
porting the local community. Such measures shall evaluate 
community outreach activities, language services, work- 
force cultural competence, and other areas as determined 
by the Secretary."; and 

(B) by striking subsection (h) and inserting the fol- 
lowing: 

"(h) Authorization of Appropriations. — For the purpose of 
carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated 
such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2011 
through 2016.". 

(2) Transfer of functions. — There are transferred to the 
Office of Minority Health in the office of the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services, all duties, responsibilities, au- 
thorities, accountabilities, functions, staff, funds, award mecha- 
nisms, and other entities under the authority of the Office of 
Minority Health of the Public Health Service as in effect on the 
date before the date of enactment of this Act, which shall con- 
tinue in effect according to the terms in effect on the date be- 
fore such date of enactment, until modified, terminated, super- 
seded, set aside, or revoked in accordance with law by the 
President, the Secretary, a court of competent jurisdiction, or 
by operation of law. 

(3) Reports. — Not later than 1 year after the date of en- 
actment of this section, and biennially thereafter, the Secretary 
of Health and Human Services shall prepare and submit to the 
appropriate committees of Congress a report describing the ac- 
tivities carried out under section 1707 of the Public Health 
Service Act (as amended by this subsection) during the period 
for which the report is being prepared. Not later than 1 year 
after the date of enactment of this section, and biennially 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10334M707A PHSA PPACA (Consolidated) 



882 



thereafter, the heads of each of the agencies of the Department 
of Health and Human Services shall submit to the Deputy As- 
sistant Secretary for Minority Health a report summarizing 
the minority health activities of each of the respective agen- 
cies. 

(b) Establishment of Individual Offices of Minority 
Health Within the Department of Health and Human Serv- 
ices— 

(1) In general. — Title XVII of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 300u et seq.) is amended by inserting after sec- 
tion 1707 the following section: 

"SEC. 1707A [42 U.S.C. 300u-6a]. INDIVIDUAL OFFICES OF MINORITY 
HEALTH WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT. 

"(a) In General. — The head of each agency specified in sub- 
section (b)(1) shall establish within the agency an office to be 
known as the Office of Minority Health. The head of each such Of- 
fice shall be appointed by the head of the agency within which the 
Office is established, and shall report directly to the head of the 
agency. The head of such agency shall carry out this section (as 
this section relates to the agency) acting through such Director. 

"(b) Specified Agencies. — The agencies referred to in sub- 
section (a) are the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the 
Health Resources and Services Administration, the Substance 
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality, the Food and Drug Administra- 
tion, and the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services. 

"(c) Director; Appointment. — Each Office of Minority Health 
established in an agency listed in subsection (a) shall be headed by 
a director, with documented experience and expertise in minority 
health services research and health disparities elimination. 

"(d) References. — Except as otherwise specified, any reference 
in Federal law to an Office of Minority Health (in the Department 
of Health and Human Services) is deemed to be a reference to the 
Office of Minority Health in the Office of the Secretary. 
"(e) Funding. — 

"(1) Allocations. — Of the amounts appropriated for a 
specified agency for a fiscal year, the Secretary must designate 
an appropriate amount of funds for the purpose of carrying out 
activities under this section through the minority health office 
of the agency. In reserving an amount under the preceding 
sentence for a minority health office for a fiscal year, the Sec- 
retary shall reduce, by substantially the same percentage, the 
amount that otherwise would be available for each of the pro- 
grams of the designated agency involved. 

"(2) Availability of funds for staffing. — The purposes 
for which amounts made available under paragraph may be ex- 
pended by a minority health office include the costs of employ- 
ing staff for such office.". 

(2) No new regulatory authority. — Nothing in this sub- 
section and the amendments made by this subsection may be 
construed as establishing regulatory authority or modifying 
any existing regulatory authority. 

(3) Limitation on termination. — Notwithstanding any 
other provision of law, a Federal office of minority health or 

June 9, 2010 



883 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10335 



Federal appointive position with primary responsibility over 
minority health issues that is in existence in an office of agen- 
cy of the Department of Health and Human Services on the 
date of enactment of this section shall not be terminated, reor- 
ganized, or have any of its power or duties transferred unless 
such termination, reorganization, or transfer is approved by an 
Act of Congress. 

(c) Redesignation of National Center on Minority Health 
and Health Disparities. — 

(1) Redesignation. — Title IV of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 281 et seq.) is amended— 

(A) by redesignating subpart 6 of part E as subpart 20; 

(B) by transferring subpart 20, as so redesignated, to 
part C of such title IV; 

(C) by inserting subpart 20, as so redesignated, after 
subpart 19 of such part C; and 

(D) in subpart 20, as so redesignated — 

(i) by redesignating sections 485E through 485H 
as sections 464z-3 through 464z-6, respectively; 

(ii) by striking "National Center on Minority 
Health and Health Disparities" each place such term 
appears and inserting "National Institute on Minority 
Health and Health Disparities"; and 

(iii) by striking "Center" each place such term ap- 
pears and inserting "Institute". 

(2) Purpose of institute; duties. — Section 464z-3 of the 
Public Health Service Act, as so redesignated, is amended — 

(A) in subsection (h)(1), by striking "research endow- 
ments at centers of excellence under section 736." and in- 
serting the following: "research endowments — 

"(1) at centers of excellence under section 736; and 
"(2) at centers of excellence under section 464z-4."; 

(B) in subsection (h)(2)(A), by striking "average" and 
inserting "median"; and 

(C) by adding at the end the following: 

"(h) Interagency Coordination. — The Director of the Insti- 
tute, as the primary Federal officials with responsibility for coordi- 
nating all research and activities conducted or supported by the 
National Institutes of Health on minority health and health dis- 
parities, shall plan, coordinate, review and evaluate research and 
other activities conducted or supported by the Institutes and Cen- 
ters of the National Institutes of Health.". 

(3) Technical and conforming amendments. — 

(A) Section 401(b)(24) of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 281(b)(24)) is amended by striking "Center" and 
inserting "Institute" 

(B) Subsection ' (d)(1) of section 903 of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299a-l(d)(D) is amended by 
striking "section 485E" and inserting "section 464z-3". 

SEC. 10335. TECHNICAL CORRECTION TO THE HOSPITAL VALUE- 
BASED PURCHASING PROGRAM [AMENDMENTS FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED ABOVE]. 

[Amended section 1886(o)(2)A) of the Social Security Act, as 
added by section 3001] 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10336 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



884 



SEC. 10336. GAO STUDY AND REPORT ON MEDICARE BENEFICIARY AC- 
CESS TO HIGH-QUALITY DIALYSIS SERVICES. 

(a) Study. — 

(1) In general. — The Comptroller General of the United 
States shall conduct a study on the impact on Medicare bene- 
ficiary access to high-quality dialysis services of including spec- 
ified oral drugs that are furnished to such beneficiaries for the 
treatment of end stage renal disease in the bundled prospective 
payment system under section 1881(b)(14) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act (42 U.S.C. 1395rr(b)(14)) (pursuant to the proposed 
rule published by the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
in the Federal Register on September 29, 2009 (74 Fed. Reg. 
49922 et seq.)). Such study shall include an analysis of — 

(A) the ability of providers of services and renal dialy- 
sis facilities to furnish specified oral drugs or arrange for 
the provision of such drugs; 

(B) the ability of providers of services and renal dialy- 
sis facilities to comply, if necessary, with applicable State 
laws (such as State pharmacy licensure requirements) in 
order to furnish specified oral drugs; 

(C) whether appropriate quality measures exist to 
safeguard care for Medicare beneficiaries being furnished 
specified oral drugs by providers of services and renal di- 
alysis facilities; and 

(D) other areas determined appropriate by the Comp- 
troller General. 

(2) Specified oral drug defined. — For purposes of para- 
graph (1), the term "specified oral drug" means a drug or bio- 
logical for which there is no injectable equivalent (or other non- 
oral form of administration). 

(b) Report. — Not later than 1 year after the date of the enact- 
ment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall submit to Congress a report containing the results of the 
study conducted under subsection (a), together with recommenda- 
tions for such legislation and administrative action as the Comp- 
troller General determines appropriate. 

Subtitle D — Provisions Relating to Title IV 

SEC. 10401. AMENDMENTS TO SUBTITLE A [AMENDMENTS FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Amended section 4001(h)(4) and (5)1 

(b) [Amended section 4002(c)1 

(c) [Amended section 4004(a)(4)1 

SEC. 10402. AMENDMENTS TO SUBTITLE B [AMENDMENTS FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED ABOVE], 

(a) [Amended section 399Z-l(a)(l)(A) of the Public Health 
Service Act, as added by section 4101(b)1 

(b) [Replaced section 1861(hhh)(4)(G) of the Social Security Act, 
as added by section 4103(b)1 

SEC. 10403. AMENDMENTS TO SUBTITLE C [AMENDMENTS FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED ABOVE]. 

[Amended section 42011 

June 9, 2010 



885 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10407 



SEC. 10404. AMENDMENTS TO SUBTITLE D [AMENDMENTS FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED ABOVE], 

[Amended section 399MM(2) of the Public Health Service Act, 
as added by section 4303~\ 

SEC. 10405. AMENDMENTS TO SUBTITLE E [AMENDMENTS FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED ABOVE]. 

[Struck section 44011 

SEC. 10406. AMENDMENT RELATING TO WAIVING COINSURANCE FOR 
PREVENTIVE SERVICES [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCOR- 
PORATED ABOVE]. 

[Replaced section 4104(b)~\ 
SEC. 10407 [42 U.S.C. 247b-9a]. BETTER DIABETES CARE. 

(a) Short Title. — This section may be cited as the "Catalyst 
to Better Diabetes Care Act of 2009". 

(b) National Diabetes Report Card. — 

(1) In GENERAL. — The Secretary, in collaboration with the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (re- 
ferred to in this section as the "Director"), shall prepare on a 
biennial basis a national diabetes report card (referred to in 
this section as a "Report Card") and, to the extent possible, for 
each State. 

(2) Contents. — 

(A) In general. — Each Report Card shall include ag- 
gregate health outcomes related to individuals diagnosed 
with diabetes and prediabetes including — 

(i) preventative care practices and quality of care; 

(ii) risk factors; and 
(hi) outcomes. 

(B) Updated reports. — Each Report Card that is pre- 
pared after the initial Report Card shall include trend 
analysis for the Nation and, to the extent possible, for each 
State, for the purpose of — 

(i) tracking progress in meeting established na- 
tional goals and objectives for improving diabetes care, 
costs, and prevalence (including Healthy People 2010); 
and 

(ii) informing policy and program development. 

(3) Availability. — The Secretary, in collaboration with the 
Director, shall make each Report Card publicly available, in- 
cluding by posting the Report Card on the Internet. 

(c) Improvement of Vital Statistics Collection. — 

(1) In GENERAL. — The Secretary, acting through the Direc- 
tor of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and in 
collaboration with appropriate agencies and States, shall — 

(A) promote the education and training of physicians 
on the importance of birth and death certificate data and 
how to properly complete these documents, including the 
collection of" such data for diabetes and other chronic dis- 
eases; 

(B) encourage State adoption of the latest standard re- 
visions of birth and death certificates; and 

(C) work with States to re-engineer their vital statis- 
tics systems in order to provide cost-effective, timely, and 
accurate vital systems data. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10408 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



886 



(2) Death certificate additional language. — In car- 
rying out this subsection, the Secretary may promote improve- 
ments to the collection of diabetes mortality data, including the 
addition of a question for the individual certifying the cause of 
death regarding whether the deceased had diabetes. 

(d) Study on Appropriate Level of Diabetes Medical Edu- 
cation. — 

(1) In general. — The Secretary shall, in collaboration with 
the Institute of Medicine and appropriate associations and 
councils, conduct a study of the impact of diabetes on the prac- 
tice of medicine in the United States and the appropriateness 
of the level of diabetes medical education that should be re- 
quired prior to licensure, board certification, and board recer- 
tification. 

(2) Report. — Not later than 2 years after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit a report on 
the study under paragraph (1) to the Committees on Ways and 
Means and Energy and Commerce of the House of Representa- 
tives and the Committees on Finance and Health, Education, 
Labor, and Pensions of the Senate. 

(e) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are authorized 
to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be 
necessary. 

SEC. 10408 [42 U.S.C 2801 note]. GRANTS FOR SMALL BUSINESSES TO 
PROVIDE COMPREHENSIVE WORKPLACE WELLNESS PRO- 
GRAMS. 

(a) Establishment. — The Secretary shall award grants to eli- 
gible employers to provide their employees with access to com- 
prehensive workplace wellness programs (as described under sub- 
section (c)). 

(b) Scope — 

(1) Duration. — The grant program established under this 
section shall be conducted for a 5-year period. 

(2) Eligible employer. — The term "eligible employer" 
means an employer (including a non-profit employer) that — 

(A) employs less than 100 employees who work 25 
hours or greater per week; and 

(B) does not provide a workplace wellness program as 
of the date of enactment of this Act. 

(c) Comprehensive Workplace Wellness Programs. — 

(1) Criteria. — The Secretary shall develop program cri- 
teria for comprehensive workplace wellness programs under 
this section that are based on and consistent with evidence- 
based research and best practices, including research and prac- 
tices as provided in the Guide to Community Preventive Serv- 
ices, the Guide to Clinical Preventive Services, and the Na- 
tional Registry for Effective Programs. 

(2) Requirements. — A comprehensive workplace wellness 
program shall be made available by an eligible employer to all 
employees and include the following components: 

(A) Health awareness initiatives (including health 
education, preventive screenings, and health risk assess- 
ments). 

June 9, 2010 



887 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 10409X402C PHSA 



(B) Efforts to maximize employee engagement (includ- 
ing mechanisms to encourage employee participation). 

(C) Initiatives to change unhealthy behaviors and life- 
style choices (including counseling, seminars, online pro- 
grams, and self-help materials). 

(D) Supportive environment efforts (including work- 
place policies to encourage healthy lifestyles, healthy eat- 
ing, increased physical activity, and improved mental 
health). 

(d) Application. — An eligible employer desiring to participate 
in the grant program under this section shall submit an application 
to the Secretary, in such manner and containing such information 
as the Secretary may require, which shall include a proposal for a 
comprehensive workplace wellness program that meet the criteria 
and requirements described under subsection (c). 

(e) Authorization of Appropriation. — For purposes of car- 
rying out the grant program under this section, there is authorized 
to be appropriated $200,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2011 
through 2015. Amounts appropriated pursuant to this subsection 
shall remain available until expended. 

SEC. 10409. CURES ACCELERATION NETWORK. 

(a) Short Title. — This section may be cited as the "Cures Ac- 
celeration Network Act of 2009". 

(b) Requirement for the Director of NIH To Establish a 
Cures Acceleration Network. — Section 402(b) of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 282(b)) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (22), by striking "and" at the end; 

(2) in paragraph (23), by striking the period and inserting 
"; and"; and 

(3) by inserting after paragraph (23), the following: 

"(24) implement the Cures Acceleration Network described 
in section 402C". 

(c) Accepting Gifts To Support the Cures Acceleration 
Network. — Section 499(c)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 290b(c)(l)) is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"(E) The Cures Acceleration Network described in sec- 
tion 402C". 

(d) Establishment of the Cures Acceleration Network. — 
Part A of title IV of the Public Health Service Act is amended by 
inserting after section 402B (42 U.S.C. 282b) the following: 

"SEC. 402C [42 U.S.C. 282d]. CURES ACCELERATION NETWORK. 

"(a) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(1) Biological product. — The term 'biological product' 
has the meaning given such term in section 351 of the Public 
Health Service Act. 

"(2) Drug; device. — The terms 'drug" and 'device' have the 
meanings given such terms in section 201 of the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act. 

"(3) High need cure. — The term 'high need cure' means 
a drug (as that term is defined by section 201(g)(1) of the Fed- 
eral Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, biological product (as that 
term is defined by section 262(i)), or device (as that term is de- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10409X402C PHSA PPACA (Consolidated) 



888 



fined by section 201(h) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cos- 
metic Act) that, in the determination of the Director of NIH — 
"(A) is a priority to diagnose, mitigate, prevent, or 
treat harm from any disease or condition; and 

"(B) for which the incentives of the commercial market 
are unlikely to result in its adequate or timely develop- 
ment. 

"(4) Medical product. — The term 'medical product' means 
a drug, device, biological product, or product that is a combina- 
tion of drugs, devices, and biological products. 
"(b) Establishment of the Cures Acceleration Network. — 
Subject to the appropriation of funds as described in subsection (g), 
there is established within the Office of the Director of NIH a pro- 
gram to be known as the Cures Acceleration Network (referred to 
in this section as 'CAN'), which shall — 

"(1) be under the direction of the Director of NIH, taking 
into account the recommendations of a CAN Review Board (re- 
ferred to in this section as the 'Board'), described in subsection 
(d); and 

"(2) award grants and contracts to eligible entities, as de- 
scribed in subsection (e), to accelerate the development of high 
need cures, including through the development of medical 
products and behavioral therapies. 
"(c) Functions. — The functions of the CAN are to — 

"(1) conduct and support revolutionary advances in basic 
research, translating scientific discoveries from bench to bed- 
side; 

"(2) award grants and contracts to eligible entities to accel- 
erate the development of high need cures; 

"(3) provide the resources necessary for government agen- 
cies, independent investigators, research organizations, bio- 
technology companies, academic research institutions, and 
other entities to develop high need cures; 

"(4) reduce the barriers between laboratory discoveries and 
clinical trials for new therapies; and 

"(5) facilitate review in the Food and Drug Administration 
for the high need cures funded by the CAN, through activities 
that may include — 

"(A) the facilitation of regular and ongoing commu- 
nication with the Food and Drug Administration regarding 
the status of activities conducted under this section; 

"(B) ensuring that such activities are coordinated with 
the approval requirements of the Food and Drug Adminis- 
tration, with the goal of expediting the development and 
approval of countermeasures and products; and 

"(C) connecting interested persons with additional 
technical assistance made available under section 565 of 
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. 
"(d) CAN Board.— 

"(1) Establishment. — There is established a Cures Accel- 
eration Network Review Board (referred to in this section as 
the 'Board'), which shall advise the Director of NIH on the con- 
duct of the activities of the Cures Acceleration Network. 
"(2) Membership. — 

June 9, 2010 



889 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 10409\402C PHSA 



"(A) In general. — 

"(i) Appointment. — The Board shall be comprised 
of 24 members who are appointed by the Secretary 
and who serve at the pleasure of the Secretary. 

"(ii) Chairperson and vice chairperson. — The 
Secretary shall designate, from among the 24 mem- 
bers appointed under clause (i), one Chairperson of the 
Board (referred to in this section as the 'Chairperson') 
and one Vice Chairperson. 
"(B) Terms.— 

"(i) In general. — Each member shall be ap- 
pointed to serve a 4-year term, except that any mem- 
ber appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the 
expiration of the term for which the member's prede- 
cessor was appointed shall be appointed for the re- 
mainder of such term. 

"(ii) Consecutive appointments; maximum 
terms. — A member may be appointed to serve not 
more than 3 terms on the Board, and may not serve 
more than 2 such terms consecutively. 
"(C) Qualifications. — 

"(i) In general. — The Secretary shall appoint in- 
dividuals to the Board based solely upon the individ- 
ual's established record of distinguished service in one 
of the areas of expertise described in clause (ii). Each 
individual appointed to the Board shall be of distin- 
guished achievement and have a broad range of dis- 
ciplinary interests. 

"(ii) Expertise. — The Secretary shall select indi- 
viduals based upon the following requirements: 
"(I) For each of the fields of — 
"(aa) basic research; 
"(bb) medicine; 
"(cc) biopharmaceuticals; 
"(dd) discovery and delivery of medical 
products; 

"(ee) bioinformatics and gene therapy; 
"(ff) medical instrumentation; and 
"(gg) regulatory review and approval of 
medical products, 
the Secretary shall select at least 1 individual who 
is eminent in such fields. 

"(II) At least 4 individuals shall be recognized 
leaders in professional venture capital or private 
equity organizations and have demonstrated expe- 
rience in private equity investing. 

"(Ill) At least 8 individuals shall represent 
disease advocacy organizations. 

"(3) EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS. — 

"(A) Appointment. — In addition to the 24 Board mem- 
bers described in paragraph (2), the Secretary shall ap- 
point as ex-officio members of the Board — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10409X402C PHSA PPACA (Consolidated) 



890 



"(i) a representative of the National Institutes of 
Health, recommended by the Secretary of the Depart- 
ment of Health and Human Services; 

"(ii) a representative of the Office of the Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs, recommended 
by the Secretary of Defense; 

"(hi) a representative of the Office of the Under 
Secretary for Health for the Veterans Health Adminis- 
tration, recommended by the Secretary of Veterans Af- 
fairs; 

"(iv) a representative of the National Science 
Foundation, recommended by the Chair of the Na- 
tional Science Board; and 

"(v) a representative of the Food and Drug Admin- 
istration, recommended by the Commissioner of Food 
and Drugs. 

"(B) Terms. — Each ex-officio member shall serve a 3- 
year term on the Board, except that the Chairperson may 
adjust the terms of the initial ex-officio members in order 
to provide for a staggered term of appointment for all such 
members. 

"(4) Responsibilities of the board and the director of 
nih. — 

"(A) Responsibilities of the board. — 

"(i) In general. — The Board shall advise, and pro- 
vide recommendations to, the Director of NIH with re- 
spect to — 

"(I) policies, programs, and procedures for car- 
rying out the duties of the Director of NIH under 
this section; and 

"(II) significant barriers to successful trans- 
lation of basic science into clinical application (in- 
cluding issues under the purview of other agencies 
and departments). 

"(ii) Report. — In the case that the Board identi- 
fies a significant barrier, as described in clause (i)(II), 
the Board shall submit to the Secretary a report re- 
garding such barrier. 

"(B) Responsibilities of the director of nih. — With 
respect to each recommendation provided by the Board 
under subparagraph (A)(i), the Director of NIH shall re- 
spond in writing to the Board, indicating whether such Di- 
rector will implement such recommendation. In the case 
that the Director of NIH indicates a recommendation of 
the Board will not be implemented, such Director shall 
provide an explanation of the reasons for not imple- 
menting such recommendation. 
"(5) Meetings. — 

"(A) In general. — The Board shall meet 4 times per 
calendar year, at the call of the Chairperson. 

"(B) Quorum; requirements; limitations. — 

"(i) Quorum. — A quorum shall consist of a total of 

13 members of the Board, excluding ex-officio mem- 
June 9, 2010 



891 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 10409X402C PHSA 



bers, with diverse representation as described in 
clause (hi). 

"(h) Chairperson or vice chairperson. — Each 
meeting of the Board shall be attended by either the 
Chairperson or the Vice Chairperson. 

"(hi) Diverse representation. — At each meeting 
of the Board, there shall be not less than one scientist, 
one representative of a disease advocacy organization, 
and one representative of a professional venture cap- 
ital or private equity organization. 
"(6) Compensation and travel expenses. — 

"(A) Compensation. — Members shall receive com- 
pensation at a rate to be fixed by the Chairperson but not 
to exceed a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual 
rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive 
Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, 
for each day (including travel time) during which the 
member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the 
Board. All members of the Board who are officers or em- 
ployees of the United States shall serve without compensa- 
tion in addition to that received for their services as offi- 
cers or employees of the United States. 

"(B) Travel expenses. — Members of the Board shall 
be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of 
subsistence, at rates authorized for persons employed 
intermittently by the Federal Government under section 
5703(b) of title 5, United States Code, while away from 
their homes or regular places of business in the perform- 
ance of services for the Board. 
"(e) Grant Program. — 

"(1) Supporting innovation. — To carry out the purposes 
described in this section, the Director of NIH shall award con- 
tracts, grants, or cooperative agreements to the entities de- 
scribed in paragraph (2), to — 

"(A) promote innovation in technologies supporting the 
advanced research and development and production of 
high need cures, including through the development of 
medical products and behavioral therapies. 

"(B) accelerate the development of high need cures, in- 
cluding through the development of medical products, be- 
havioral therapies, and biomarkers that demonstrate the 
safety or effectiveness of medical products; or 

"(C) help the award recipient establish protocols that 
comply with Food and Drug Administration standards and 
otherwise permit the recipient to meet regulatory require- 
ments at all stages of development, manufacturing, review, 
approval, and safety surveillance of a medical product. 
"(2) Eligible entities. — To receive assistance under para- 
graph (1), an entity shall — 

"(A) be a public or private entity, which may include 
a private or public research institution, an institution of 
higher education, a medical center, a biotechnology com- 
pany, a pharmaceutical company, a disease advocacy orga- 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10409X402C PHSA PPACA (Consolidated) 



892 



nization, a patient advocacy organization, or an academic 
research institution; 

"(B) submit an application containing — 

"(i) a detailed description of the project for which 
the entity seeks such grant or contract; 
"(ii) a timetable for such project; 
"(hi) an assurance that the entity will submit — 
"(I) interim reports describing the entity's — 
"(aa) progress in carrying out the project; 

and 

"(bb) compliance with all provisions of 
this section and conditions of receipt of such 
grant or contract; and 

"(II) a final report at the conclusion of the 
grant period, describing the outcomes of the 
project; and 

"(iv) a description of the protocols the entity will 
follow to comply with Food and Drug Administration 
standards and regulatory requirements at all stages of 
development, manufacturing, review, approval, and 
safety surveillance of a medical product; and 
"(C) provide such additional information as the Direc- 
tor of NIH may require. 
"(3) Awards.— 

"(A) The cures acceleration partnership 

AWARDS. — 

"(i) Initial award amount. — Each award under 
this subparagraph shall be not more than $15,000,000 
per project for the first fiscal year for which the 
project is funded, which shall be payable in one pay- 
ment. 

"(ii) Funding in subsequent fiscal years. — An 
eligible entity receiving an award under clause (i) may 
apply for additional funding for such project by sub- 
mitting to the Director of NIH the information re- 
quired under subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph 
(2). The Director may fund a project of such eligible 
entity in an amount not to exceed $15,000,000 for a 
fiscal year subsequent to the initial award under 
clause (i). 

"(hi) Matching funds. — As a condition for receiv- 
ing an award under this subsection, an eligible entity 
shall contribute to the project non-Federal funds in 
the amount of $1 for every $3 awarded under clauses 
(i) and (ii), except that the Director of NIH may waive 
or modify such matching requirement in any case 
where the Director determines that the goals and ob- 
jectives of this section cannot adequately be carried 
out unless such requirement is waived. 
"(B) The cures acceleration grant awards. — 

"(i) Initial award amount. — Each award under 
this subparagraph shall be not more than $15,000,000 
per project for the first fiscal year for which the 

June 9, 2010 



893 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 10409\402C PHSA 



project is funded, which shall be payable in one pay- 
ment. 

"(ii) Funding in subsequent fiscal years. — An 
eligible entity receiving an award under clause (i) may 
apply for additional funding for such project by sub- 
mitting to the Board the information required under 
subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph (2). The Di- 
rector of NIH may fund a project of such eligible entity 
in an amount not to exceed $15,000,000 for a fiscal 
year subsequent to the initial award under clause (i). 
"(C) The cures acceleration flexible research 
awards. — If the Director of NIH determines that the goals 
and objectives of this section cannot adequately be carried 
out through a contract, grant, or cooperative agreement, 
the Director of NIH shall have flexible research authority 
to use other transactions to fund projects in accordance 
with the terms and conditions of this section. Awards 
made under such flexible research authority for a fiscal 
year shall not exceed 20 percent of the total funds appro- 
priated under subsection (g)(1) for such fiscal year. 
"(4) Suspension of awards for defaults, noncompli- 
ance WITH PROVISIONS AND PLANS, AND DIVERSION OF FUNDS; 
repayment OF funds. — The Director of NIH may suspend the 
award to any entity upon noncompliance by such entity with 
provisions and plans under this section or diversion of funds. 

"(5) Audits. — The Director of NIH may enter into agree- 
ments with other entities to conduct periodic audits of the 
projects funded by grants or contracts awarded under this sub- 
section. 

"(6) Closeout procedures. — At the end of a grant or con- 
tract period, a recipient shall follow the closeout procedures 
under section 74.71 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or 
any successor regulation). 

"(7) Review. — A determination by the Director of NIH as 
to whether a drug, device, or biological product is a high need 
cure (for purposes of subsection (a)(3)) shall not be subject to 
judicial review. 

"(f) Competitive Basis of Awards. — Any grant, cooperative 
agreement, or contract awarded under this section shall be award- 
ed on a competitive basis. 

"(g) Authorization of Appropriations. — 

"(1) In general. — For purposes of carrying out this sec- 
tion, there are authorized to be appropriated $500,000,000 for 
fiscal year 2010, and such sums as may be necessary for subse- 
quent fiscal years. Funds appropriated under this section shall 
be available until expended. 

"(2) Limitation on use of funds otherwise appro- 
priated. — No funds appropriated under this Act, other than 
funds appropriated under paragraph (1), may be allocated to 
the Cures Acceleration Network.". 



Sec. 10410 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



894 



SEC. 10410. CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE FOR DEPRESSION. 

(a) Short Title. — This section may be cited as the "Estab- 
lishing a Network of Health-Advancing National Centers of Excel- 
lence for Depression Act of 2009" or the "ENHANCED Act of 2009". 

(b) Centers of Excellence for Depression. — Subpart 3 of 
part B of title V of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 290bb 
et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 520A the following: 

"SEC. 520B [42 U.S.C. 290bb-33]. NATIONAL CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE 
FOR DEPRESSION. 

"(a) Depressive Disorder Defined. — In this section, the term 
'depressive disorder' means a mental or brain disorder relating to 
depression, including major depression, bipolar disorder, and re- 
lated mood disorders. 

"(b) Grant Program — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary, acting through the Ad- 
ministrator, shall award grants on a competitive basis to eligi- 
ble entities to establish national centers of excellence for de- 
pression (referred to in this section as 'Centers'), which shall 
engage in activities related to the treatment of depressive dis- 
orders. 

"(2) Allocation of awards. — If the funds authorized 
under subsection (f) are appropriated in the amounts provided 
for under such subsection, the Secretary shall allocate such 
amounts so that — 

"(A) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of the ENHANCED Act of 2009, not more than 20 Centers 
may be established; and 

"(B) not later than September 30, 2016, not more than 
30 Centers may be established. 
"(3) Grant period. — 

"(A) In general. — A grant awarded under this section 
shall be for a period of 5 years. 

"(B) Renewal. — A grant awarded under subparagraph 
(A) may be renewed, on a competitive basis, for 1 addi- 
tional 5-year period, at the discretion of the Secretary. In 
determining whether to renew a grant, the Secretary shall 
consider the report cards issued under subsection (e)(2). 
"(4) Use of funds. — Grant funds awarded under this sub- 
section shall be used for the establishment and ongoing activi- 
ties of the recipient of such funds. 
"(5) Eligible entities. — 

"(A) Requirements. — To be eligible to receive a grant 
under this section, an entity shall — 

"(i) be an institution of higher education or a pub- 
lic or private nonprofit research institution; and 

"(ii) submit an application to the Secretary at such 
time and in such manner as the Secretary may re- 
quire, as described in subparagraph (B). 
"(B) Application. — An application described in sub- 
paragraph (A)(ii) shall include — 

"(i) evidence that such entity — 

"(I) provides, or is capable of coordinating 
with other entities to provide, comprehensive 
health services with a focus on mental health 

June 9, 2010 



895 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 10410X520B PHSA 



services and subspecialty expertise for depressive 
disorders; 

"(II) collaborates with other mental health 
providers, as necessary, to address co-occurring 
mental illnesses; 

"(III) is capable of training health profes- 
sionals about mental health; and 
"(ii) such other information, as the Secretary may 
require. 

"(C) Priorities. — In awarding grants under this sec- 
tion, the Secretary shall give priority to eligible entities 
that meet 1 or more of the following criteria: 

"(i) Demonstrated capacity and expertise to serve 
the targeted population. 

"(ii) Existing infrastructure or expertise to provide 
appropriate, evidence-based and culturally and lin- 
guistically competent services. 

"(hi) A location in a geographic area with dis- 
proportionate numbers of underserved and at-risk pop- 
ulations in medically underserved areas and health 
professional shortage areas. 

"(iv) Proposed innovative approaches for outreach 
to initiate or expand services. 

"(v) Use of the most up-to-date science, practices, 
and interventions available. 

"(vi) Demonstrated capacity to establish coopera- 
tive and collaborative agreements with community 
mental health centers and other community entities to 
provide mental health, social, and human services to 
individuals with depressive disorders. 
"(6) National coordinating center. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary, acting through the 
Administrator, shall designate 1 recipient of a grant under 
this section to be the coordinating center of excellence for 
depression (referred to in this section as the 'coordinating 
center'). The Secretary shall select such coordinating cen- 
ter on a competitive basis, based upon the demonstrated 
capacity of such center to perform the duties described in 
subparagraph (C). 

"(B) Application. — A Center that has been awarded a 
grant under paragraph (1) may apply for designation as 
the coordinating center by submitting an application to the 
Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such information as the Secretary may require. 
"(C) Duties. — The coordinating center shall — 

"(i) develop, administer, and coordinate the net- 
work of Centers under this section; 

"(ii) oversee and coordinate the national database 
described in subsection (d); 

"(hi) lead a strategy to disseminate the findings 
and activities of the Centers through such database; 
and 

"(iv) serve as a liaison with the Administration, 
the National Registry of Evidence-based Programs and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10410\520B PHSA PPACA (Consolidated) 



896 



Practices of the Administration, and any Federal 
interagency or interagency forum on mental health. 
"(7) Matching funds. — The Secretary may not award a 
grant or contract under this section to an entity unless the en- 
tity agrees that it will make available (directly or through con- 
tributions from other public or private entities) non-Federal 
contributions toward the activities to be carried out under the 
grant or contract in an amount equal to $1 for each $5 of Fed- 
eral funds provided under the grant or contract. Such non-Fed- 
eral matching funds may be provided directly or through dona- 
tions from public or private entities and may be in cash or in- 
kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services. 
"(c) Activities of the Centers. — Each Center shall carry out 
the following activities: 

"(1) General activities. — Each Center shall — 

"(A) integrate basic, clinical, or health services inter- 
disciplinary research and practice in the development, im- 
plementation, and dissemination of evidence-based inter- 
ventions; 

"(B) involve a broad cross-section of stakeholders, such 
as researchers, clinicians, consumers, families of con- 
sumers, and voluntary health organizations, to develop a 
research agenda and disseminate findings, and to provide 
support in the implementation of evidence-based practices; 

"(C) provide training and technical assistance to men- 
tal health professionals, and engage in and disseminate 
translational research with a focus on meeting the needs 
of individuals with depressive disorders; and 

"(D) educate policy makers, employers, community 
leaders, and the public about depressive disorders to re- 
duce stigma and raise awareness of treatments. 
"(2) Improved treatment standards, clinical guide- 
lines, DIAGNOSTIC PROTOCOLS, AND CARE COORDINATION PRAC- 
TICE. — Each Center shall collaborate with other Centers in the 
network to — 

"(A) develop and implement treatment standards, clin- 
ical guidelines, and protocols that emphasize primary pre- 
vention, early intervention, treatment for, and recovery 
from, depressive disorders; 

"(B) foster communication with other providers attend- 
ing to co-occurring physical health conditions such as car- 
diovascular, diabetes, cancer, and substance abuse dis- 
orders; 

"(C) leverage available community resources, develop 
and implement improved self-management programs, and, 
when appropriate, involve family and other providers of so- 
cial support in the development and implementation of 
care plans; and 

"(D) use electronic health records and telehealth tech- 
nology to better coordinate and manage, and improve ac- 
cess to, care, as determined by the coordinating center. 
"(3) Translational research through collaboration 

of centers and community-based organizations. — each 

Center shall — 

June 9, 2010 



897 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 10410X520B PHSA 



"(A) demonstrate effective use of a public-private part- 
nership to foster collaborations among members of the net- 
work and community-based organizations such as commu- 
nity mental health centers and other social and human 
services providers; 

"(B) expand interdisciplinary, translational, and pa- 
tient-oriented research and treatment; and 

"(C) coordinate with accredited academic programs to 
provide ongoing opportunities for the professional and con- 
tinuing education of mental health providers. 
"(d) National Database. — 

"(1) In general. — The coordinating center shall establish 
and maintain a national, publicly available database to im- 
prove prevention programs, evidence-based interventions, and 
disease management programs for depressive disorders, using 
data collected from the Centers, as described in paragraph (2). 

"(2) Data collection. — Each Center shall submit data 
gathered at such center, as appropriate, to the coordinating 
center regarding — 

"(A) the prevalence and incidence of depressive dis- 
orders; 

"(B) the health and social outcomes of individuals with 
depressive disorders; 

"(C) the effectiveness of interventions designed, tested, 
and evaluated; 

"(D) other information, as the Secretary may require. 
"(3) Submission of data to the administrator. — The co- 
ordinating center shall submit to the Administrator the data 
and financial information gathered under paragraph (2). 

"(4) Publication using data from the database. — A 
Center, or an individual affiliated with a Center, may publish 
findings using the data described in paragraph (2) only if such 
center submits such data to the coordinating center, as re- 
quired under such paragraph. 

"(e) Establishment of Standards; Report Cards and Rec- 
ommendations; Third Party Review. — 

"(1) Establishment of standards. — The Secretary, acting 
through the Administrator, shall establish performance stand- 
ards for — 

"(A) each Center; and 
"(B) the network of Centers as a whole. 
"(2) Report cards. — The Secretary, acting through the 
Administrator, shall — 

"(A) for each Center, not later than 3 years after the 
date on which such center of excellence is established and 
annually thereafter, issue a report card to the coordinating 
center to rate the performance of such Center; and 

"(B) not later than 3 years after the date on which the 
first grant is awarded under subsection (b)(1) and annually 
thereafter, issue a report card to Congress to rate the per- 
formance of the network of centers of excellence as a 
whole. 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10411 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



898 



"(3) Recommendations. — Based upon the report cards de- 
scribed in paragraph (2), the Secretary shall, not later than 
September 30, 2015— 

"(A) make recommendations to the Centers regarding 
improvements such centers shall make; and 

"(B) make recommendations to Congress for expanding 
the Centers to serve individuals with other types of mental 
disorders. 

"(4) Third party review. — Not later than 3 years after the 
date on which the first grant is awarded under subsection 
(b)(1) and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall arrange for 
an independent third party to conduct an evaluation of the net- 
work of Centers to ensure that such centers are meeting the 
goals of this section. 

"(f) Authorization of Appropriations. — 

"(1) In general. — To carry out this section, there are au- 
thorized to be appropriated — 

"(A) $100,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2011 
through 2015; and 

"(B) $150,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2016 
through 2020. 

"(2) Allocation of funds authorized. — Of the amount 
appropriated under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year, the Sec- 
retary shall determine the allocation of each Center receiving 
a grant under this section, but in no case may the allocation 
be more than $5,000,000, except that the Secretary may allo- 
cate not more than $10,000,000 to the coordinating center.". 

SEC. 10411. PROGRAMS RELATING TO CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE. 

(a) Short Title. — This subtitle may be cited as the "Con- 
genital Heart Futures Act". 

(b) Programs Relating to Congenital Heart Disease. — 

(1) National congenital heart disease surveillance 
system. — Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 280g et seq.), as amended by section 5405, is further 
amended by adding at the end the following: 

"SEC. 399V-2 [42 U.S.C. 280g-13]. NATIONAL CONGENITAL HEART DIS- 
EASE SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary, acting through the Director 
of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may — 

"(1) enhance and expand infrastructure to track the epide- 
miology of congenital heart disease and to organize such infor- 
mation into a nationally-representative, population-based sur- 
veillance system that compiles data concerning actual occur- 
rences of congenital heart disease, to be known as the 'Na- 
tional Congenital Heart Disease Surveillance System'; or 

"(2) award a grant to one eligible entity to undertake the 
activities described in paragraph (1). 

"(b) Purpose. — The purpose of the Congenital Heart Disease 
Surveillance System shall be to facilitate further research into the 
types of health services patients use and to identify possible areas 
for educational outreach and prevention in accordance with stand- 
ard practices of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 

June 9, 2010 



899 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10411X425 PHSA 



"(c) Content. — The Congenital Heart Disease Surveillance 
System — 

"(1) may include information concerning the incidence and 
prevalence of congenital heart disease in the United States; 

"(2) may be used to collect and store data on congenital 
heart disease, including data concerning — 

"(A) demographic factors associated with congenital 
heart disease, such as age, race, ethnicity, sex, and family 
history of individuals who are diagnosed with the disease; 

"(B) risk factors associated with the disease; 

"(C) causation of the disease; 

"(D) treatment approaches; and 

"(E) outcome measures, such that analysis of the out- 
come measures will allow derivation of evidence-based best 
practices and guidelines for congenital heart disease pa- 
tients; and 

"(3) may ensure the collection and analysis of longitudinal 
data related to individuals of all ages with congenital heart 
disease, including infants, young children, adolescents, and 
adults of all ages. 

"(d) Public Access. — The Congenital Heart Disease Surveil- 
lance System shall be made available to the public, as appropriate, 
including congenital heart disease researchers. 

"(e) Patient Privacy. — The Secretary shall ensure that the 
Congenital Heart Disease Surveillance System is maintained in a 
manner that complies with the regulations promulgated under sec- 
tion 264 of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
of 1996. 

"(f) Eligibility for Grant. — To be eligible to receive a grant 
under subsection (a)(2), an entity shall — 

"(1) be a public or private nonprofit entity with specialized 
experience in congenital heart disease; and 

"(2) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
in such manner, and containing such information as the Sec- 
retary may require.". 

(2) Congenital heart disease research. — Subpart 2 of 
part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
285b et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"SEC. 425 [42 U.S.C. 285b-8]. CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE. 

"(a) In General. — The Director of the Institute may expand, 
intensify, and coordinate research and related activities of the In- 
stitute with respect to congenital heart disease, which may include 
congenital heart disease research with respect to — 

"(1) causation of congenital heart disease, including genetic 

causes; 

"(2) long-term outcomes in individuals with congenital 
heart disease, including infants, children, teenagers, adults, 
and elderly individuals; 

"(3) diagnosis, treatment, and prevention; 

"(4) studies using longitudinal data and retrospective anal- 
ysis to identify effective treatments and outcomes for individ- 
uals with congenital heart disease; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10411 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



900 



"(5) identifying barriers to life-long care for individuals 
with congenital heart disease. 

"(b) Coordination of Research Activities. — The Director of 
the Institute may coordinate research efforts related to congenital 
heart disease among multiple research institutions and may de- 
velop research networks. 

"(c) Minority and Medically Underserved Communities. — 
In carrying out the activities described in this section, the Director 
of the Institute shall consider the application of such research and 
other activities to minority and medically underserved commu- 
nities.". 

(c) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are authorized 
to be appropriated to carry out the amendments made by this sec- 
tion such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2011 
through 2015. 

SEC. 10412. AUTOMATED DEFIBRILLATION IN ADAM'S MEMORY ACT. 

Section 312 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 244) 
is amended — 

(1) in subsection (c)(6), after "clearinghouse" insert ", that 
shall be administered by an organization that has substantial 
expertise in pediatric education, pediatric medicine, and 
electrophysiology and sudden death,"; and 

(2) in the first sentence of subsection (e), by striking "fiscal 
year 2003" and all that follows through "2006" and inserting 
"for each of fiscal years 2003 through 2014". 

SEC. 10413. YOUNG WOMEN'S BREAST HEALTH AWARENESS AND SUP- 
PORT OF YOUNG WOMEN DIAGNOSED WITH BREAST CAN- 
CER. 

(a) Short Title. — This section may be cited as the "Young 
Women's Breast Health Education and Awareness Requires Learn- 
ing Young Act of 2009" or the "EARLY Act". 

(b) Amendment. — Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 241 et seq.), as amended by this Act, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following: 

"PART V— PROGRAMS RELATING TO BREAST 
HEALTH AND CANCER 

"SEC. 399NN [42 U.S.C. 280m]. YOUNG WOMEN'S BREAST HEALTH 
AWARENESS AND SUPPORT OF YOUNG WOMEN DIAG- 
NOSED with breast cancer. 

"(a) Public Education Campaign. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary, acting through the Direc- 
tor of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall 
conduct a national evidence-based education campaign to in- 
crease awareness of young women's knowledge regarding — 

"(A) breast health in young women of all racial, ethnic, 
and cultural backgrounds; 

"(B) breast awareness and good breast health habits; 
"(C) the occurrence of breast cancer and the general 
and specific risk factors in women who may be at high risk 
for breast cancer based on familial, racial, ethnic, and cul- 
tural backgrounds such as Ashkenazi Jewish populations; 

June 9, 2010 



901 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10413\399NN PHSA 



"(D) evidence-based information that would encourage 
young women and their health care professional to in- 
crease early detection of breast cancers; and 

"(E) the availability of health information and other 
resources for young women diagnosed with breast cancer. 
"(2) Evidence-based, age appropriate messages. — The 
campaign shall provide evidence-based, age-appropriate mes- 
sages and materials as developed by the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention and the Advisory Committee estab- 
lished under paragraph (4). 

"(3) Media campaign. — In conducting the education cam- 
paign under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall award grants to 
entities to establish national multimedia campaigns oriented to 
young women that may include advertising through television, 
radio, print media, billboards, posters, all forms of existing and 
especially emerging social networking media, other Internet 
media, and any other medium determined appropriate by the 
Secretary. 

"(4) Advisory committee. — 

"(A) Establishment. — Not later than 60 days after 
the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary, 
acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, shall establish an advisory com- 
mittee to assist in creating and conducting the education 
campaigns under paragraph (1) and subsection (b)(1). 

"(B) Membership. — The Secretary, acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Preven- 
tion, shall appoint to the advisory committee under sub- 
paragraph (A) such members as deemed necessary to prop- 
erly advise the Secretary, and shall include organizations 
and individuals with expertise in breast cancer, disease 
prevention, early detection, diagnosis, public health, social 
marketing, genetic screening and counseling, treatment, 
rehabilitation, palliative care, and survivorship in young 
women. 

"(b) Health Care Professional Education Campaign. — The 
Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, and in consultation with the Administrator 
of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall conduct 
an education campaign among physicians and other health care 
professionals to increase awareness — 

"(1) of breast health, symptoms, and early diagnosis and 
treatment of breast cancer in young women, including specific 
risk factors such as family history of cancer and women that 
may be at high risk for breast cancer, such as Ashkenazi Jew- 
ish population; 

"(2) on how to provide counseling to young women about 
their breast health, including knowledge of their family cancer 
history and importance of providing regular clinical breast ex- 
aminations; 

"(3) concerning the importance of discussing healthy be- 
haviors, and increasing awareness of services and programs 
available to address overall health and wellness, and making 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10413\399NN PHSA PPACA (Consolidated) 



902 



patient referrals to address tobacco cessation, good nutrition, 
and physical activity; 

"(4) on when to refer patients to a health care provider 
with genetics expertise; 

"(5) on how to provide counseling that addresses long-term 
survivorship and health concerns of young women diagnosed 
with breast cancer; and 

"(6) on when to provide referrals to organizations and in- 
stitutions that provide credible health information and sub- 
stantive assistance and support to young women diagnosed 
with breast cancer. 

"(c) Prevention Research Activities. — The Secretary, acting 
through — 

"(1) the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, shall conduct prevention research on breast cancer 
in younger women, including — 

"(A) behavioral, survivorship studies, and other re- 
search on the impact of breast cancer diagnosis on young 
women; 

"(B) formative research to assist with the development 
of educational messages and information for the public, 
targeted populations, and their families about breast 
health, breast cancer, and healthy lifestyles; 

"(C) testing and evaluating existing and new social 
marketing strategies targeted at young women; and 

"(D) surveys of health care providers and the public 
regarding knowledge, attitudes, and practices related to 
breast health and breast cancer prevention and control in 
high-risk populations; and 

"(2) the Director of the National Institutes of Health, shall 
conduct research to develop and validate new screening tests 
and methods for prevention and early detection of breast can- 
cer in young women. 

"(d) Support for Young Women Diagnosed With Breast 
Cancer. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall award grants to or- 
ganizations and institutions to provide health information from 
credible sources and substantive assistance directed to young 
women diagnosed with breast cancer and pre-neoplastic breast 
diseases. 

"(2) Priority. — In making grants under paragraph (1), the 
Secretary shall give priority to applicants that deal specifically 
with young women diagnosed with breast cancer and pre-neo- 
plastic breast disease. 

"(e) No Duplication of Effort. — In conducting an education 
campaign or other program under subsections (a), (b), (c), or (d), 
the Secretary shall avoid duplicating other existing Federal breast 
cancer education efforts. 

"(f) Measurement; Reporting. — The Secretary, acting through 
the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
shall— 

"(1) measure — 

"(A) young women's awareness regarding breast 
health, including knowledge of family cancer history, spe- 

June 9, 2010 



903 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10501V399V-3 PHSA 



cific risk factors and early warning signs, and young wom- 
en's proactive efforts at early detection; 

"(B) the number or percentage of young women uti- 
lizing information regarding lifestyle interventions that 
foster healthy behaviors; 

"(C) the number or percentage of young women receiv- 
ing regular clinical breast exams; and 

"(D) the number or percentage of young women who 
perform breast self exams, and the frequency of such 
exams, before the implementation of this section; 
"(2) not less than every 3 years, measure the impact of 
such activities; and 

"(3) submit reports to the Congress on the results of such 
measurements. 

"(g) Definition. — In this section, the term 'y° un g women' 
means women 15 to 44 years of age. 

"(h) Authorization of Appropriations. — To carry out sub- 
sections (a), (b), (c)(1), and (d), there are authorized to be appro- 
priated $9,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2010 through 2014.". 

Subtitle E — Provisions Relating to Title V 

SEC. 10501. AMENDMENTS TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT, THE 
SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, AND TITLE V OF THIS ACT. 

(a) Section 5101 of this Act is amended — 

(1) [Amended subsection (c)(2)(B)(i)(ll)~\ 

(2) [Amended subsection (d)(4)(A)~\ 

(3) in subsection (i)(2)(B), by inserting "optometrists, oph- 
thalmologists," after "occupational therapists,". [Note: "occupa- 
tional therapists," does not appear in subparagraph (B) of sub- 
section (i)(2), but does appear in subparagraphs (A) and (C) of 
subsection (i)(2).~\ 

(b) [Added section 5104 at the end of subtitle B of title V] 

(c) [Amended section 399V of the Public Health Service Act, as 
added by section 5313] 

(d) Section 738(a)(3) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 293b(a)(3)) is amended by inserting "schools offering physi- 
cian assistant education programs," after "public health,". 

(e) [Added section 5316 at the end of subtitle D of title V] 

(f) [Redesignated section 399W of the Public Health Service Act, 
added by section 5405, as section 399V-1 and amended subsection 
(b)(2)(A) of that section and conformed cross-references to that sec- 
tion in sections 934 &amp; 935(b) of the PHSA, as added by sections 
3501 &amp; 3503] 

(g) Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act 42 U.S.C. 
280g et seq.), as amended by section 10411, is amended by adding 
at the end the following: 

"SEC. 399V-3 [42 U.S.C. 280g-14]. NATIONAL DIABETES PREVENTION 
PROGRAM. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary, acting through the Director 
of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall establish 
a national diabetes prevention program (referred to in this section 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10501 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



904 



as the 'program') targeted at adults at high risk for diabetes in 
order to eliminate the preventable burden of diabetes. 

"(b) Program Activities. — The program described in sub- 
section (a) shall include — 

"(1) a grant program for community -based diabetes preven- 
tion program model sites; 

"(2) a program within the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention to determine eligibility of entities to deliver commu- 
nity-based diabetes prevention services; 

"(3) a training and outreach program for lifestyle interven- 
tion instructors; and 

"(4) evaluation, monitoring and technical assistance, and 
applied research carried out by the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention. 

"(c) Eligible Entities. — To be eligible for a grant under sub- 
section (b)(1), an entity shall be a State or local health department, 
a tribal organization, a national network of community-based non- 
profits focused on health and wellbeing, an academic institution, or 
other entity, as the Secretary determines. 

"(d) Authorization of Appropriations. — For the purpose of 
carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated 
such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2010 
through 2014.". 

(h) [Repealed section 5501(c)~\ 

(i) (l) [Repealed section 5502~\ 

(2XA) Section 1861(aa)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395w(aa)(3)(A)) is amended to read as follows: 

"(A) services of the type described in subparagraphs (A) 
through (C) of paragraph (1) and preventive services (as de- 
fined in section 1861(ddd)(3)); and". 

(B) The amendment made by subparagraph (A) shall apply to 
services furnished on or after January 1, 2011. 

(SKA) Section 1834 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395m), as amended by section 4105, is amended by adding at the 
end the following new subsection: 

"(o) Development and Implementation of Prospective Pay- 
ment System. — 

"(1) Development. — 

"(A) In general. — The Secretary shall develop a pro- 
spective payment system for payment for Federally quali- 
fied health center services furnished by Federally qualified 
health centers under this title. Such system shall include 
a process for appropriately describing the services fur- 
nished by Federally qualified health centers and shall es- 
tablish payment rates for specific payment codes based on 
such appropriate descriptions of services. Such system 
shall be established to take into account the type, inten- 
sity, and duration of services furnished by Federally quali- 
fied health centers. Such system may include adjustments, 
including geographic adjustments, determined appropriate 
by the Secretary. 

"(B) Collection of data and evaluation. — By not 
later than January 1, 2011, the Secretary shall require 
Federally qualified health centers to submit to the Sec- 
June 9, 2010 



905 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10501 



retary such information as the Secretary may require in 
order to develop and implement the prospective payment 
system under this subsection, including the reporting of 
services using HCPCS codes. 
"(2) Implementation. — 

"(A) In general. — Notwithstanding section 
1833(a)(3)(A), the Secretary shall provide, for cost report- 
ing periods beginning on or after October 1, 2014, for pay- 
ments of prospective payment rates for Federally qualified 
health center services furnished by Federally qualified 
health centers under this title in accordance with the pro- 
spective payment system developed by the Secretary under 
paragraph (1). 

"(B) Payments. — 

"(i) Initial payments. — The Secretary shall imple- 
ment such prospective payment system so that the es- 
timated aggregate amount of prospective payment 
rates (determined prior to the application of section 
1833(a)(l)(Z)) under this title for Federally qualified 
health center services in the first year that such sys- 
tem is implemented is equal to 100 percent of the esti- 
mated amount of reasonable costs (determined without 
the application of a per visit payment limit or produc- 
tivity screen and prior to the application of section 
1866(a)(2)(A)(ii)) that would have occurred for such 
services under this title in such year if the system had 
not been implemented. 

"(ii) Payments in subsequent years. — Payment 
rates in years after the year of implementation of such 
system shall be the payment rates in the previous 
year increased — 

"(I) in the first year after implementation of 
such system, by the percentage increase in the 
MEI (as defined in section 1842(i)(3)) for the year 
involved; and 

"(II) in subsequent years, by the percentage 
increase in a market basket of Federally qualified 
health center goods and services as promulgated 
through regulations, or if such an index is not 
available, by the percentage increase in the MEI 
(as defined in section 1842(i)(3)) for the year in- 
volved. 

"(C) Preparation for pps implementation. — Not- 
withstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary 
may establish and implement by program instruction or 
otherwise the payment codes to be used under the prospec- 
tive payment system under this section.". 
(B) Section 1833(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
13951(a)(1)), as amended by section 4104, is amended — 

(i) by striking "and" before "(Y)"; and 

(ii) by inserting before the semicolon at the end the fol- 
lowing: ", and (Z) with respect to Federally qualified health 
center services for which payment is made under section 
1834(o), the amounts paid shall be 80 percent of the lesser of 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10501Y749B PHSA PPACA (Consolidated) 



906 



the actual charge or the amount determined under such sec- 
tion". 

(C) Section 1833(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
13951(a)) is amended — 

(i) in paragraph (3)(B)(i) — 

(I) by inserting "(I)" after "otherwise been provided"; 

and 

(II) by inserting ", or (II) in the case of such services 
furnished on or after the implementation date of the pro- 
spective payment system under section 1834(o), under 
such section (calculated as if '100 percent' were substituted 
for '80 percent' in such section) for such services if the in- 
dividual had not been so enrolled" after "been so enrolled"; 
and 

(ii) by adding at the end the following flush sentence: 
"Paragraph (3)(A) shall not apply to Federally qualified health 
center services furnished on or after the implementation date 
of the prospective payment system under section 1834(0).". 

(j) [Added new subsection at the end of section 5505] 
(k) [Added section 5606 at the end of subtitle G of title V] 
(1) Part C of title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 293k et seq.) is amended — 

(1) after the part heading, by inserting the following: 

"Subpart I — Medical Training Generally"; 

and 

(2) by inserting at the end the following: 

"Subpart II — Training in Underserved 
Communities 

"SEC. 749B [42 U.S.C. 293m]. RURAL PHYSICIAN TRAINING GRANTS. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary, acting through the Adminis- 
trator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall 
establish a grant program for the purposes of assisting eligible en- 
tities in recruiting students most likely to practice medicine in un- 
derserved rural communities, providing rural-focused training and 
experience, and increasing the number of recent allopathic and os- 
teopathic medical school graduates who practice in underserved 
rural communities. 

"(b) Eligible Entities. — In order to be eligible to receive a 
grant under this section, an entity shall — 

"(1) be a school of allopathic or osteopathic medicine ac- 
credited by a nationally recognized accrediting agency or asso- 
ciation approved by the Secretary for this purpose, or any com- 
bination or consortium of such schools; and 

"(2) submit an application to the Secretary that includes a 
certification that such entity will use amounts provided to the 
institution as described in subsection (d)(1). 
"(c) Priority. — In awarding grant funds under this section, the 
Secretary shall give priority to eligible entities that — 

June 9, 2010 



907 



PPACA (Consolidated) Sec. 10501Y749B PHSA 



"(1) demonstrate a record of successfully training students, 
as determined by the Secretary, who practice medicine in un- 
derserved rural communities; 

"(2) demonstrate that an existing academic program of the 
eligible entity produces a high percentage, as determined by 
the Secretary, of graduates from such program who practice 
medicine in underserved rural communities; 

"(3) demonstrate rural community institutional partner- 
ships, through such mechanisms as matching or contributory 
funding, documented in-kind services for implementation, or 
existence of training partners with interprofessional expertise 
in community health center training locations or other similar 
facilities; or 

"(4) submit, as part of the application of the entity under 
subsection (b), a plan for the long-term tracking of where the 
graduates of such entity practice medicine. 
"(d) Use of Funds. — 

"(1) Establishment. — An eligible entity receiving a grant 
under this section shall use the funds made available under 
such grant to establish, improve, or expand a rural-focused 
training program (referred to in this section as the 'Program') 
meeting the requirements described in this subsection and to 
carry out such program. 

"(2) Structure of program.— An eligible entity shall — 

"(A) enroll no fewer than 10 students per class year 
into the Program; and 

"(B) develop criteria for admission to the Program that 
gives priority to students — 

"(i) who have originated from or lived for a period 
of 2 or more years in an underserved rural commu- 
nity; and 

"(ii) who express a commitment to practice medi- 
cine in an underserved rural community. 
"(3) Curricula. — The Program shall require students to 
enroll in didactic coursework and clinical experience particu- 
larly applicable to medical practice in underserved rural com- 
munities, including — 

"(A) clinical rotations in underserved rural commu- 
nities, and in applicable specialties, or other coursework or 
clinical experience deemed appropriate by the Secretary; 
and 

"(B) in addition to core school curricula, additional 
coursework or training experiences focused on medical 
issues prevalent in underserved rural communities. 
"(4) Residency placement assistance. — Where available, 
the Program shall assist all students of the Program in obtain- 
ing clinical training experiences in locations with postgraduate 
programs offering residency training opportunities in under- 
served rural communities, or in local residency training pro- 
grams that support and train physicians to practice in under- 
served rural communities. 

"(5) Program student cohort support. — The Program 
shall provide and require all students of the Program to par- 
ticipate in group activities designed to further develop, main- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10501 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



908 



tain, and reinforce the original commitment of such students to 

practice in an underserved rural community. 

"(e) Annual Reporting. — An eligible entity receiving a grant 
under this section shall submit an annual report to the Secretary 
on the success of the Program, based on criteria the Secretary de- 
termines appropriate, including the residency program selection of 
graduating students who participated in the Program. 

"(f) Regulations. — Not later than 60 days after the date of en- 
actment of this section, the Secretary shall by regulation define 
'underserved rural community' for purposes of this section. 

"(g) Supplement Not Supplant. — Any eligible entity receiving 
funds under this section shall use such funds to supplement, not 
supplant, any other Federal, State, and local funds that would oth- 
erwise be expended by such entity to carry out the activities de- 
scribed in this section. 

"(h) Maintenance of Effort. — With respect to activities for 
which funds awarded under this section are to be expended, the en- 
tity shall agree to maintain expenditures of non-Federal amounts 
for such activities at a level that is not less than the level of such 
expenditures maintained by the entity for the fiscal year preceding 
the fiscal year for which the entity receives a grant under this sec- 
tion. 

"(i) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are authorized 
to be appropriated $4,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2010 
through 2013.". 

(m)(l) Section 768 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
295c) is amended to read as follows: 

"SEC. 768 [42 U.S.C. 295c]. PREVENTIVE MEDICINE AND PUBLIC 
HEALTH TRAINING GRANT PROGRAM. 

"(a) Grants. — The Secretary, acting through the Administrator 
of the Health Resources and Services Administration and in con- 
sultation with the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, shall award grants to, or enter into contracts with, eli- 
gible entities to provide training to graduate medical residents in 
preventive medicine specialties. 

"(b) Eligibility. — To be eligible for a grant or contract under 
subsection (a), an entity shall be — 

"(1) an accredited school of public health or school of medi- 
cine or osteopathic medicine; 

"(2) an accredited public or private nonprofit hospital; 
"(3) a State, local, or tribal health department; or 
"(4) a consortium of 2 or more entities described in para- 
graphs (1) through (3). 

"(c) Use of Funds. — Amounts received under a grant or con- 
tract under this section shall be used to — 

"(1) plan, develop (including the development of curricula), 

operate, or participate in an accredited residency or internship 

program in preventive medicine or public health; 

"(2) defray the costs of practicum experiences, as required 

in such a program; and 

"(3) establish, maintain, or improve — 

"(A) academic administrative units (including depart- 
ments, divisions, or other appropriate units) in preventive 
medicine and public health; or 

June 9, 2010 



909 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10501 



"(B) programs that improve clinical teaching in pre- 
ventive medicine and public health. 
"(d) Report. — The Secretary shall submit to the Congress an 
annual report on the program carried out under this section.". 

(2) Section 770(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 295e(a)) is amended to read as follows: 
"(a) In General. — For the purpose of carrying out this sub- 
part, there is authorized to be appropriated $43,000,000 for fiscal 
year 2011, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fis- 
cal years 2012 through 2015.". 

(n)(l) Subsection (i) of section 331 of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 254d) of the Public Health Service Act is amended— 

(A) in paragraph (1), by striking "In carrying out subpart 
III" and all that follows through the period and inserting "In 
carrying out subpart III, the Secretary may, in accordance with 
this subsection, issue waivers to individuals who have entered 
into a contract for obligated service under the Scholarship Pro- 
gram or the Loan Repayment Program under which the indi- 
viduals are authorized to satisfy the requirement of obligated 
service through providing clinical practice that is half time."; 

(B) in paragraph (2) — 

(i) in subparagraphs (A)(ii) and (B), by striking "less 
than full time" each place it appears and inserting "half 
time"; 

(ii) in subparagraphs (C) and (F), by striking "less 
than full-time service" each place it appears and inserting 
"half-time service"; and 

(iii) by amending subparagraphs (D) and (E) to read as 
follows: 

"(D) the entity and the Corps member agree in writing 
that the Corps member will perform half-time clinical practice; 

"(E) the Corps member agrees in writing to fulfill all of the 
service obligations under section 338C through half-time clin- 
ical practice and either — 

"(i) double the period of obligated service that would 
otherwise be required; or 

"(ii) in the case of contracts entered into under section 
338B, accept a minimum service obligation of 2 years with 
an award amount equal to 50 percent of the amount that 
would otherwise be payable for full-time service; and"; and 

(C) in paragraph (3), by striking "In evaluating a dem- 
onstration project described in paragraph (1)" and inserting "In 
evaluating waivers issued under paragraph (1)". 

(2) Subsection (j) of section 331 of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 254d) is amended by adding at the end the fol- 
lowing: 

"(5) The terms 'full time' and 'full-time' mean a minimum 
of 40 hours per week in a clinical practice, for a minimum of 
45 weeks per year. 

"(6) The terms 'half time' and 'half-time' mean a minimum 
of 20 hours per week (not to exceed 39 hours per week) in a 
clinical practice, for a minimum of 45 weeks per year.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10502 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



910 



(3) Section 337(b)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 254j(b)(l)) is amended by striking "Members may not be re- 
appointed to the Council.". 

(4) Section 338B(g)(2)(A) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 2541-l(g)(2)(A)) is amended by striking "$35,000" and in- 
serting "$50,000, plus, beginning with fiscal year 2012, an amount 
determined by the Secretary on an annual basis to reflect infla- 
tion,". 

(5) [Amended subsection (a) of section 338C of the Public 
Health Service Act, as amended by section 5508~\ 

SEC. 10502. INFRASTRUCTURE TO EXPAND ACCESS TO CARE. 

(a) Appropriation. — There are authorized to be appropriated, 
and there are appropriated to the Department of Health and 
Human Services, $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2010, to remain avail- 
able for obligation until September 30, 2011, to be used for debt 
service on, or direct construction or renovation of, a health care fa- 
cility that provides research, inpatient tertiary care, or outpatient 
clinical services. Such facility shall be affiliated with an academic 
health center at a public research university in the United States 
that contains a State's sole public academic medical and dental 
school. 

(b) Requirement. — Amount appropriated under subsection (a) 
may only be made available by the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services upon the receipt of an application from the Governor of a 
State that certifies that — 

(1) the new health care facility is critical for the provision 
of greater access to health care within the State; 

(2) such facility is essential for the continued financial via- 
bility of the State's sole public medical and dental school and 
its academic health center; 

(3) the request for Federal support represents not more 
than 40 percent of the total cost of the proposed new facility; 
and 

(4) the State has established a dedicated funding mecha- 
nism to provide all remaining funds necessary to complete the 
construction or renovation of the proposed facility. 

SEC. 10503 [42 U.S.C. 254b-2]. COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS AND THE 
NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS FUND. 

(a) Purpose. — It is the purpose of this section to establish a 
Community Health Center Fund (referred to in this section as the 
"CHC Fund"), to be administered through the Office of the Sec- 
retary of the Department of Health and Human Services to provide 
for expanded and sustained national investment in community 
health centers under section 330 of the Public Health Service Act 
and the National Health Service Corps. 

(b) Funding. — There is authorized to be appropriated, and 
there is appropriated, out of any monies in the Treasury not other- 
wise appropriated, to the CHC Fund — 

(1) to be transferred to the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services to provide enhanced funding for the commu- 
nity health center program under section 330 of the Public 
Health Service Act — [As revised by section 2303 of HCERA] 
(A) $1,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2011; 

June 9, 2010 



911 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10601 



(B) $1,200,000,000 for fiscal year 2012; 

(C) $1,500,000,000 for fiscal year 2013; 

(D) $2,200,000,000 for fiscal year 2014; and 

(E) $3,600,000,000 for fiscal year 2015; and 

(2) to be transferred to the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services to provide enhanced funding for the National 
Health Service Corps — 

(A) $290,000,000 for fiscal year 2011; 

(B) $295,000,000 for fiscal year 2012; 

(C) $300,000,000 for fiscal year 2013; 

(D) $305,000,000 for fiscal year 2014; and 

(E) $310,000,000 for fiscal year 2015. 

(c) Construction. — There is authorized to be appropriated, 
and there is appropriated, out of any monies in the Treasury not 
otherwise appropriated, $1,500,000,000 to be available for fiscal 
years 2011 through 2015 to be used by the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services for the construction and renovation of community 
health centers. 

(d) Use of Fund. — The Secretary of Health and Human Serv- 
ices shall transfer amounts in the CHC Fund to accounts within 
the Department of Health and Human Services to increase funding, 
over the fiscal year 2008 level, for community health centers and 
the National Health Service Corps. 

(e) Availability. — Amounts appropriated under subsections (b) 
and (c) shall remain available until expended. 

SEC. 10504 [42 U.S.C. 256 note]. DEMONSTRATION PROJECT TO PRO- 
VIDE ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE CARE. 

(a) In General. — Not later than 6 months after the date of en- 
actment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
(referred to in this section as the "Secretary"), acting through the 
Health Resources and Services Administration, shall establish a 3 
year demonstration project in up to 10 States to provide access to 
comprehensive health care services to the uninsured at reduced 
fees. The Secretary shall evaluate the feasibility of expanding the 
project to additional States. 

(b) Eligibility. — To be eligible to participate in the demonstra- 
tion project, an entity shall be a State-based, nonprofit, public-pri- 
vate partnership that provides access to comprehensive health care 
services to the uninsured at reduced fees. Each State in which a 
participant selected by the Secretary is located shall receive not 
more than $2,000,000 to establish and carry out the project for the 
3-year demonstration period. 

(c) Authorization. — There is authorized to be appropriated 
such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section. 

Subtitle F— Provisions Relating to Title VI 

SEC. 10601. REVISIONS TO LIMITATION ON MEDICARE EXCEPTION TO 
THE PROHIBITION ON CERTAIN PHYSICIAN REFERRALS 
FOR HOSPITALS [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCORPORATED 
ABOVE]. 

(a) Section 1877(i) of the Social Security Act, as added by sec- 
tion 6001(a), is amended — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10602 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



912 



(1) in paragraph (l)(A)(i), by striking "February 1, 2010" 
and inserting "August 1, 2010"; and [Note: paragraph (l)(A)(i) 
says "December 31, 2010", not "February" or "August", so 
amendment could not be executed] 

(2) [Amended paragraph (3)(A)] 
(b) [Amended section 6001(b)(2)] 

SEC. 10602. CLARIFICATIONS TO PATIENT-CENTERED OUTCOMES RE- 
SEARCH [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

[Amended section 1181 of the Social Security Act (as added by 
section 6301)] 

SEC. 10603. STRIKING PROVISIONS RELATING TO INDP7IDUAL PRO- 
VIDER APPLICATION FEES [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCOR- 
PORATED ABOVE}. 

(a) [Amended section 1866(j)(2)(C) of the Social Security Act, as 
added by section 6401(a)] 

(b) [Replaced section 6401(a)(2)] 

SEC. 10604. TECHNICAL CORRECTION TO SECTION 6405 [AMENDMENTS 
FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

[Replaced paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 6405(b)] 

SEC. 10605. CERTAIN OTHER PROVIDERS PERMITTED TO CONDUCT 
FACE TO FACE ENCOUNTER FOR HOME HEALTH SERV- 
ICES [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Amended section 1814(a)(2)(C) of the Social Security Act, 
as amended by section 6407(a)(1)] 

(b) [Amended section 1835(a)(2)(A)(iv) of the Social Security 
Act, as amended by section 6407(a)(2)] 

SEC. 10606. HEALTH CARE FRAUD ENFORCEMENT. 

(a) Fraud Sentencing Guidelines. — 

(1) Definition. — In this subsection, the term "Federal 
health care offense" has the meaning given that term in sec- 
tion 24 of title 18, United States Code, as amended by this Act. 

(2) Review and amendments. — Pursuant to the authority 
under section 994 of title 28, United States Code, and in ac- 
cordance with this subsection, the United States Sentencing 
Commission shall — 

(A) review the Federal Sentencing Guidelines and pol- 
icy statements applicable to persons convicted of Federal 
health care offenses; 

(B) amend the Federal Sentencing Guidelines and pol- 
icy statements applicable to persons convicted of Federal 
health care offenses involving Government health care pro- 
grams to provide that the aggregate dollar amount of 
fraudulent bills submitted to the Government health care 
program shall constitute prima facie evidence of the 
amount of the intended loss by the defendant; and 

(C) amend the Federal Sentencing Guidelines to pro- 
vide — 

(i) a 2-level increase in the offense level for any 
defendant convicted of a Federal health care offense 
relating to a Government health care program which 
involves a loss of not less than $1,000,000 and less 
than $7,000,000; 

June 9, 2010 



913 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10606 



(ii) a 3-level increase in the offense level for any 
defendant convicted of a Federal health care offense 
relating to a Government health care program which 
involves a loss of not less than $7,000,000 and less 
than $20,000,000; 

(iii) a 4-level increase in the offense level for any 
defendant convicted of a Federal health care offense 
relating to a Government health care program which 
involves a loss of not less than $20,000,000; and 

(iv) if appropriate, otherwise amend the Federal 
Sentencing Guidelines and policy statements applica- 
ble to persons convicted of Federal health care offenses 
involving Government health care programs. 

(3) Requirements. — In carrying this subsection, the 
United States Sentencing Commission shall — 

(A) ensure that the Federal Sentencing Guidelines and 
policy statements — 

(i) reflect the serious harms associated with 
health care fraud and the need for aggressive and ap- 
propriate law enforcement action to prevent such 
fraud; and 

(ii) provide increased penalties for persons con- 
victed of health care fraud offenses in appropriate cir- 
cumstances; 

(B) consult with individuals or groups representing 
health care fraud victims, law enforcement officials, the 
health care industry, and the Federal judiciary as part of 
the review described in paragraph (2); 

(C) ensure reasonable consistency with other relevant 
directives and with other guidelines under the Federal 
Sentencing Guidelines; 

(D) account for any aggravating or mitigating cir- 
cumstances that might justify exceptions, including cir- 
cumstances for which the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, 
as in effect on the date of enactment of this Act, provide 
sentencing enhancements; 

(E) make any necessary conforming changes to the 
Federal Sentencing Guidelines; and 

(F) ensure that the Federal Sentencing Guidelines 
adequately meet the purposes of sentencing. 

(b) Intent Requirement for Health Care Fraud. — Section 
1347 of title 18, United States Code, is amended — 

(1) by inserting "(a)" before "Whoever knowingly"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following: 

"(b) With respect to violations of this section, a person need not 
have actual knowledge of this section or specific intent to commit 
a violation of this section.". 

(c) Health Care Fraud Offense. — Section 24(a) of title 18, 
United States Code, is amended — 

(1) in paragraph (1), by striking the semicolon and insert- 
ing "or section 1128B of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1320a-7b); or"; and 

(2) in paragraph (2) — 

(A) by inserting "1349," after "1343,"; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10606X3A CRIPA. 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



914 



(B) by inserting "section 301 of the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 331), or section 501 of 
the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 
U.S.C. 1131)," after "title,", 
(d) Subpoena Authority Relating to Health Care. — 

(1) Subpoenas under the health insurance portability 
and accountability act of 1996. — Section 1510(b) of title 18, 
United States Code, is amended — 

(A) in paragraph (1), by striking "to the grand jury"; 

and 

(B) in paragraph (2) — 

(i) in subparagraph (A), by striking "grand jury 
subpoena" and inserting "subpoena for records"; and 

(ii) in the matter following subparagraph (B), by 
striking "to the grand jury". 

(2) Subpoenas under the civil rights of institutional- 
ized persons act. — The Civil Rights of Institutionalized Per- 
sons Act (42 U.S.C. 1997 et seq.) is amended by inserting after 
section 3 the following: 

"SEC. 3A [42 U.S.C. 1997a-l]. SUBPOENA AUTHORITY. 

"(a) Authority. — The Attorney General, or at the direction of 
the Attorney General, any officer or employee of the Department 
of Justice may require by subpoena access to any institution that 
is the subject of an investigation under this Act and to any docu- 
ment, record, material, file, report, memorandum, policy, proce- 
dure, investigation, video or audio recording, or quality assurance 
report relating to any institution that is the subject of an investiga- 
tion under this Act to determine whether there are conditions 
which deprive persons residing in or confined to the institution of 
any rights, privileges, or immunities secured or protected by the 
Constitution or laws of the United States. 

"(b) Issuance and Enforcement of Subpoenas. — 

"(1) Issuance. — Subpoenas issued under this section — 

"(A) shall bear the signature of the Attorney General 
or any officer or employee of the Department of Justice as 
designated by the Attorney General; and 

"(B) shall be served by any person or class of persons 
designated by the Attorney General or a designated officer 
or employee for that purpose. 

"(2) Enforcement. — In the case of contumacy or failure to 
obey a subpoena issued under this section, the United States 
district court for the judicial district in which the institution is 
located may issue an order requiring compliance. Any failure 
to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court 
as a contempt that court. 

"(c) Protection of Subpoenaed Records and Informa- 
tion. — Any document, record, material, file, report, memorandum, 
policy, procedure, investigation, video or audio recording, or quality 
assurance report or other information obtained under a subpoena 
issued under this section — 

"(1) may not be used for any purpose other than to protect 

the rights, privileges, or immunities secured or protected by 

June 9, 2010 



915 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10607\399V-4 PHSA 



the Constitution or laws of the United States of persons who 
reside, have resided, or will reside in an institution; 

"(2) may not be transmitted by or within the Department 
of Justice for any purpose other than to protect the rights, 
privileges, or immunities secured or protected by the Constitu- 
tion or laws of the United States of persons who reside, have 
resided, or will reside in an institution; and 

"(3) shall be redacted, obscured, or otherwise altered if 
used in any publicly available manner so as to prevent the dis- 
closure of any personally identifiable information.". 

SEC. 10607. STATE DEMONSTRATION PROGRAMS TO EVALUATE AL- 
TERNATIVES TO CURRENT MEDICAL TORT LITIGATION. 

Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
280g et seq.), as amended by this Act, is further amended by add- 
ing at the end the following: 

"SEC. 399V-4 [42 U.S.C. 280g-15]. STATE DEMONSTRATION PROGRAMS 
TO EVALUATE ALTERNATIVES TO CURRENT MEDICAL 
TORT LITIGATION. 

"(a) In General. — The Secretary is authorized to award dem- 
onstration grants to States for the development, implementation, 
and evaluation of alternatives to current tort litigation for resolving 
disputes over injuries allegedly caused by health care providers or 
health care organizations. In awarding such grants, the Secretary 
shall ensure the diversity of the alternatives so funded. 

"(b) Duration. — The Secretary may award grants under sub- 
section (a) for a period not to exceed 5 years. 

"(c) Conditions for Demonstration Grants. — 

"(1) Requirements. — Each State desiring a grant under 
subsection (a) shall develop an alternative to current tort liti- 
gation that— 

"(A) allows for the resolution of disputes over injuries 
allegedly caused by health care providers or health care or- 
ganizations; and 

"(B) promotes a reduction of health care errors by en- 
couraging the collection and analysis of patient safety data 
related to disputes resolved under subparagraph (A) by or- 
ganizations that engage in efforts to improve patient safe- 
ty and the quality of health care. 

"(2) Alternative to current tort litigation. — Each 
State desiring a grant under subsection (a) shall demonstrate 
how the proposed alternative described in paragraph (1)(A) — 
"(A) makes the medical liability system more reliable 

by increasing the availability of prompt and fair resolution 

of disputes; 

"(B) encourages the efficient resolution of disputes; 

"(C) encourages the disclosure of health care errors; 

"(D) enhances patient safety by detecting, analyzing, 
and helping to reduce medical errors and adverse events; 

"(E) improves access to liability insurance; 

"(F) fully informs patients about the differences in the 
alternative and current tort litigation; 

"(G) provides patients the ability to opt out of or vol- 
untarily withdraw from participating in the alternative at 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10607\399V-4 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



916 



any time and to pursue other options, including litigation, 
outside the alternative; 

"(H) would not conflict with State law at the time of 
the application in a way that would prohibit the adoption 
of an alternative to current tort litigation; and 

"(I) would not limit or curtail a patient's existing legal 
rights, ability to file a claim in or access a State's legal 
system, or otherwise abrogate a patient's ability to file a 
medical malpractice claim. 

"(3) Sources of compensation. — Each State desiring a 
grant under subsection (a) shall identify the sources from and 
methods by which compensation would be paid for claims re- 
solved under the proposed alternative to current tort litigation, 
which may include public or private funding sources, or a com- 
bination of such sources. Funding methods shall to the extent 
practicable provide financial incentives for activities that im- 
prove patient safety. 

"(4) Scope. — 

"(A) In general. — Each State desiring a grant under 
subsection (a) shall establish a scope of jurisdiction (such 
as Statewide, designated geographic region, a designated 
area of health care practice, or a designated group of 
health care providers or health care organizations) for the 
proposed alternative to current tort litigation that is suffi- 
cient to evaluate the effects of the alternative. No scope of 
jurisdiction shall be established under this paragraph that 
is based on a health care payer or patient population. 

"(B) Notification of patients. — A State shall dem- 
onstrate how patients would be notified that they are re- 
ceiving health care services that fall within such scope, 
and the process by which they may opt out of or volun- 
tarily withdraw from participating in the alternative. The 
decision of the patient whether to participate or continue 
participating in the alternative process shall be made at 
any time and shall not be limited in any way. 
"(5) Preference in awarding demonstration grants. — 
In awarding grants under subsection (a), the Secretary shall 
give preference to States — 

"(A) that have developed the proposed alternative 
through substantive consultation with relevant stake- 
holders, including patient advocates, health care providers 
and health care organizations, attorneys with expertise in 
representing patients and health care providers, medical 
malpractice insurers, and patient safety experts; 

"(B) that make proposals that are likely to enhance 
patient safety by detecting, analyzing, and helping to re- 
duce medical errors and adverse events; and 

"(C) that make proposals that are likely to improve ac- 
cess to liability insurance. 
"(d) Application. — 

"(1) In general. — Each State desiring a grant under sub- 
section (a) shall submit to the Secretary an application, at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
Secretary may require. 

June 9, 2010 



917 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10607\399V-4 PHSA 



"(2) Review panel. — 

"(A) In general. — In reviewing applications under 

paragraph (1), the Secretary shall consult with a review 

panel composed of relevant experts appointed by the 

Comptroller General. 
"(B) Composition. — 

"(i) Nominations. — The Comptroller General shall 
solicit nominations from the public for individuals to 
serve on the review panel. 

"(ii) Appointment. — The Comptroller General 
shall appoint, at least 9 but not more than 13, highly 
qualified and knowledgeable individuals to serve on 
the review panel and shall ensure that the following 
entities receive fair representation on such panel: 
"(I) Patient advocates. 

"(II) Health care providers and health care or- 
ganizations. 

"(Ill) Attorneys with expertise in representing 
patients and health care providers. 
"(IV) Medical malpractice insurers. 
"(V) State officials. 
"(VI) Patient safety experts. 
"(C) Chairperson. — The Comptroller General, or an 
individual within the Government Accountability Office 
designated by the Comptroller General, shall be the chair- 
person of the review panel. 

"(D) Availability of information. — The Comptroller 
General shall make available to the review panel such in- 
formation, personnel, and administrative services and as- 
sistance as the review panel may reasonably require to 
carry out its duties. 

"(E) Information from agencies. — The review panel 
may request directly from any department or agency of the 
United States any information that such panel considers 
necessary to carry out its duties. To the extent consistent 
with applicable laws and regulations, the head of such de- 
partment or agency shall furnish the requested informa- 
tion to the review panel. 
"(e) Reports. — 

"(1) By state. — Each State receiving a grant under sub- 
section (a) shall submit to the Secretary an annual report eval- 
uating the effectiveness of activities funded with grants award- 
ed under such subsection. Such report shall, at a minimum, in- 
clude the impact of the activities funded on patient safety and 
on the availability and price of medical liability insurance. 

"(2) By secretary. — The Secretary shall submit to Con- 
gress an annual compendium of the reports submitted under 
paragraph (1) and an analysis of the activities funded under 
subsection (a) that examines any differences that result from 
such activities in terms of the quality of care, number and na- 
ture of medical errors, medical resources used, length of time 
for dispute resolution, and the availability and price of liability 
insurance. 

"(f) Technical Assistance. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10B07\399V-4 PHSA 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



918 



"(1) In general. — The Secretary shall provide technical 
assistance to the States applying for or awarded grants under 
subsection (a). 

"(2) Requirements. — Technical assistance under para- 
graph (1) shall include — 

"(A) guidance on non-economic damages, including the 
consideration of individual facts and circumstances in de- 
termining appropriate payment, guidance on identifying 
avoidable injuries, and guidance on disclosure to patients 
of health care errors and adverse events; and 

"(B) the development, in consultation with States, of 
common definitions, formats, and data collection infra- 
structure for States receiving grants under this section to 
use in reporting to facilitate aggregation and analysis of 
data both within and between States. 
"(3) Use of common definitions, formats, and data 
collection infrastructure. — States not receiving grants 
under this section may also use the common definitions, for- 
mats, and data collection infrastructure developed under para- 
graph (2XB). 
"(g) Evaluation. — 

"(1) In general. — The Secretary, in consultation with the 
review panel established under subsection (d)(2), shall enter 
into a contract with an appropriate research organization to 
conduct an overall evaluation of the effectiveness of grants 
awarded under subsection (a) and to annually prepare and sub- 
mit a report to Congress. Such an evaluation shall begin not 
later than 18 months following the date of implementation of 
the first program funded by a grant under subsection (a). 

"(2) Contents. — The evaluation under paragraph (1) shall 
include — 

"(A) an analysis of the effects of the grants awarded 
under subsection (a) with regard to the measures described 
in paragraph (3); 

"(B) for each State, an analysis of the extent to which 
the alternative developed under subsection (c)(1) is effec- 
tive in meeting the elements described in subsection (c)(2); 

"(C) a comparison among the States receiving grants 
under subsection (a) of the effectiveness of the various al- 
ternatives developed by such States under subsection 
(c)(1); 

"(D) a comparison, considering the measures described 
in paragraph (3), of States receiving grants approved 
under subsection (a) and similar States not receiving such 
grants; and 

"(E) a comparison, with regard to the measures de- 
scribed in paragraph (3), of — 

"(i) States receiving grants under subsection (a); 

"(ii) States that enacted, prior to the date of enact- 
ment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act, any cap on non-economic damages; and 

"(hi) States that have enacted, prior to the date of 
enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act, a requirement that the complainant obtain 

June 9, 2010 



919 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10607\399V-4 PHSA 



an opinion regarding the merit of the claim, although 
the substance of such opinion may have no bearing on 
whether the complainant may proceed with a case. 
"(3) Measures. — The evaluations under paragraph (2) 
shall analyze and make comparisons on the basis of — 

"(A) the nature and number of disputes over injuries 
allegedly caused by health care providers or health care or- 
ganizations; 

"(B) the nature and number of claims in which tort 
litigation was pursued despite the existence of an alter- 
native under subsection (a); 

"(C) the disposition of disputes and claims, including 
the length of time and estimated costs to all parties; 

"(D) the medical liability environment; 

"(E) health care quality; 

"(F) patient safety in terms of detecting, analyzing, 
and helping to reduce medical errors and adverse events; 

"(G) patient and health care provider and organization 
satisfaction with the alternative under subsection (a) and 
with the medical liability environment; and 

"(H) impact on utilization of medical services, appro- 
priately adjusted for risk. 

"(4) Funding. — The Secretary shall reserve 5 percent of 
the amount appropriated in each fiscal year under subsection 
(k) to carry out this subsection. 
"(h) MedPAC and MACPAC Reports.— 

"(1) MedPAC. — The Medicare Payment Advisory Commis- 
sion shall conduct an independent review of the alternatives to 
current tort litigation that are implemented under grants 
under subsection (a) to determine the impact of such alter- 
natives on the Medicare program under title XVIII of the So- 
cial Security Act, and its beneficiaries. 

"(2) MACPAC— The Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Ac- 
cess Commission shall conduct an independent review of the 
alternatives to current tort litigation that are implemented 
under grants under subsection (a) to determine the impact of 
such alternatives on the Medicaid or CHIP programs under ti- 
tles XIX and XXI of the Social Security Act, and their bene- 

fi.C13.riGS 

"(3) Reports.— Not later than December 31, 2016, the 
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission and the Medicaid and 
CHIP Payment and Access Commission shall each submit to 
Congress a report that includes the findings and recommenda- 
tions of each respective Commission based on independent re- 
views conducted under paragraphs (1) and (2), including an 
analysis of the impact of the alternatives reviewed on the effi- 
ciency and effectiveness of the respective programs, 
"(i) Option To Provide for Initial Planning Grants. — Of 
the funds appropriated pursuant to subsection (k), the Secretary 
may use a portion not to exceed $500,000 per State to provide plan- 
ning grants to such States for the development of demonstration 
project applications meeting the criteria described in subsection (c). 
In selecting States to receive such planning grants, the Secretary 
shall give preference to those States in which State law at the time 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10608 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



920 



of the application would not prohibit the adoption of an alternative 
to current tort litigation. 

"(j) Definitions. — In this section: 

"(1) Health care services. — The term 'health care serv- 
ices' means any services provided by a health care provider, or 
by any individual working under the supervision of a health 
care provider, that relate to — 

"(A) the diagnosis, prevention, or treatment of any 
human disease or impairment; or 

"(B) the assessment of the health of human beings. 
"(2) Health care organization. — The term 'health care 
organization' means any individual or entity which is obligated 
to provide, pay for, or administer health benefits under any 
health plan. 

"(3) Health care provider. — The term 'health care pro- 
vider' means any individual or entity — 

"(A) licensed, registered, or certified under Federal or 
State laws or regulations to provide health care services; 
or 

"(B) required to be so licensed, registered, or certified 
but that is exempted by other statute or regulation. 

"(k) Authorization of Appropriations. — There are author- 
ized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $50,000,000 for 
the 5-fiscal year period beginning with fiscal year 2011. 

"(1) Current State Efforts To Establish Alternative To 
Tort Litigation. — Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
limit any prior, current, or future efforts of any State to establish 
any alternative to tort litigation. 

"(m) Rule of Construction. — Nothing in this section shall be 
construed as limiting states' authority over or responsibility for 
their state justice systems.". 

SEC. 10608. EXTENSION OF MEDICAL MALPRACTICE COVERAGE TO 
FREE CLINICS. 

(a) In General. — Section 224(o)(l) of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 233(o)(l)) is amended by inserting after "to an indi- 
vidual" the following: ", or an officer, governing board member, em- 
ployee, or contractor of a free clinic shall in providing services for 
the free clinic,". 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by this section 
shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act and apply to 
any act or omission which occurs on or after that date. 

SEC. 10609. LABELING CHANGES. 

Section 505(j) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
U.S.C. 355(j)) is amended by adding at the end the following: 

"(10)(A) If the proposed labeling of a drug that is the subject 
of an application under this subsection differs from the listed drug 
due to a labeling revision described under clause (i), the drug that 
is the subject of such application shall, notwithstanding any other 
provision of this Act, be eligible for approval and shall not be con- 
sidered misbranded under section 502 if — 

"(i) the application is otherwise eligible for approval under 
this subsection but for expiration of patent, an exclusivity pe- 
riod, or of a delay in approval described in paragraph 

June 9, 2010 



921 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10902 



(5)(B)(iii), and a revision to the labeling of the listed drug has 
been approved by the Secretary within 60 days of such expira- 
tion; 

"(ii) the labeling revision described under clause (i) does 
not include a change to the 'Warnings' section of the labeling; 

"(in) the sponsor of the application under this subsection 
agrees to submit revised labeling of the drug that is the subject 
of such application not later than 60 days after the notification 
of any changes to such labeling required by the Secretary; and 
"(iv) such application otherwise meets the applicable re- 
quirements for approval under this subsection. 
"(B) If, after a labeling revision described in subparagraph 
(A)(i), the Secretary determines that the continued presence in 
interstate commerce of the labeling of the listed drug (as in effect 
before the revision described in subparagraph (A)(i)) adversely im- 
pacts the safe use of the drug, no application under this subsection 
shall be eligible for approval with such labeling.". 

Subtitle G — Provisions Relating to Title 

VIII 

SEC. 10801. PROVISIONS RELATING TO TITLE VIII [AMENDMENTS 
FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE], 

(a) {Amended sections 3203 and 3204 of the Public Health 
Service Act, as added by section 8002(a)(l)~\ 

(b) [Amended heading for subsection (d) of section 8002~\ 

(c) [Amended section 602 1 (d)(2) (A) (iv) of the Deficit Reduction 
Act of 2005, as added by section 8002(d)] 

Subtitle H — Provisions Relating to Title IX 

SEC. 10901. MODIFICATIONS TO EXCISE TAX ON HIGH COST EM- 
PLOYER-SPONSORED HEALTH COVERAGE [AMENDMENTS 
FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Amended paragraph (3) of section 49801(f) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986, as added by section 9001] 

(b) [Amended clause (i) of section 49801(d)(1)(B) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986, as added by section 90011 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2017. 
[As revised by section 1401(b)(2) of HCERA] 

SEC. 10902. INFLATION ADJUSTMENT OF LIMITATION ON HEALTH 
FLEXIBLE SPENDING ARRANGEMENTS UNDER CAFE- 
TERIA PLANS [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCORPORATED 
ABOVE]. 

(a) [Replaced subsection (i) of section 125 of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986, as added by section 9005 and is further amend- 
ed by section 1403(b) of HCERA] 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by this section 
shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2012. 
[As revised by section 1403(a) of HCERA] 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10903 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



922 



SEC. 10903. MODIFICATION OF LIMITATION ON CHARGES BY CHARI- 
TABLE HOSPITALS [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCORPORATED 
ABOVE]. 

(a) [Amended subparagraph (A) of section 501(r)(5) of the Inter- 
nal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by section 90071 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by this section 
shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enact- 
ment of this Act. 

SEC. 10904. MODIFICATION OF ANNUAL FEE ON MEDICAL DEVICE 
MANUFACTURERS AND IMPORTERS [AMENDMENTS FULLY 
INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Amended section 9009, which was subsequently repealed by 
section 1404(d) of HCERA] 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall take effect as if included in the enactment of section 9009. 

SEC. 10905. MODIFICATION OF ANNUAL FEE ON HEALTH INSURANCE 
PROVIDERS [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Replaced section 9010(b)] 

(b) [Replaced section 9101(e); subsequently superseded by 
amendment made by section 1406(a)(4) of HCERA] 

(c) [Amended section 9010(c)(2) by adding new subparagraphs 
(C) through (E)1 

(d) [Replaced section 9010(h)(3)] 

(e) [Amended subsection (i) of section 90101 

(f) Conforming Amendments. — 

(1) [Amended section 9010(a)(l)~\ 

(2) [Amended section 9010(c)(2)(B)] 

(3) Section 9010(c)(3) of this Act is amended by adding at 
the end the following new sentence: [sentence omitted; place- 
ment "at the end" is unclear and probably intended to be added 
at the end of subparagraph (A)~\ 

(4) [Amended section 9010(g)(l)~\ 

(5) Section 9010(j) of this Act is amended — 

(A) by striking "2008" and inserting "2009", and [Not 
executed as "2008" does not appear in provision; superseded 
by amendment made by section 1406(a)(6) of HCERA~\ 

(B) [Struck other language] 

(g) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall take effect as if included in the enactment of section 9010. 

SEC. 10906. MODIFICATIONS TO ADDITIONAL HOSPITAL INSURANCE 
TAX ON HIGH-INCOME TAXPAYERS [AMENDMENTS FULLY 
INCORPORATED ABOVE]. 

(a) [Amended section 3101(b)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986, as added by section 9015(a)(1)] 

(b) [Amended section 1401(b)(2)(A) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986, as added by section 9015(b)(l)~\ 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply with respect to remuneration received, and taxable 
years beginning, after December 31, 2012. 



923 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10908 



SEC. 10907. EXCISE TAX ON INDOOR TANNING SERVICES IN LIEU OF 
ELECTIVE COSMETIC MEDICAL PROCEDURES ISUB- 
STITUTES FOR SECTION 9017 OF PPACA\. 

(a) In General. — The provisions of, and amendments made by, 
section 9017 of this Act are hereby deemed null, void, and of no ef- 
fect. 

(b) Excise Tax on Indoor Tanning Services. — Subtitle D of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new chapter: 

"CHAPTER 49— COSMETIC SERVICES 

"Sec. 5000B. Imposition of tax on indoor tanning services. 

"SEC. 5000B. IMPOSITION OF TAX ON INDOOR TANNING SERVICES. 

"(a) In General. — There is hereby imposed on any indoor tan- 
ning service a tax equal to 10 percent of the amount paid for such 
service (determined without regard to this section), whether paid 
by insurance or otherwise. 

"(b) Indoor Tanning Service. — For purposes of this section — 
"(1) In general. — The term 'indoor tanning service' means 
a service employing any electronic product designed to incor- 
porate 1 or more ultraviolet lamps and intended for the irra- 
diation of an individual by ultraviolet radiation, with wave- 
lengths in air between 200 and 400 nanometers, to induce skin 
tanning. 

"(2) Exclusion of phototherapy services. — Such term 
does not include any phototherapy service performed by a li- 
censed medical professional. 
"(c) Payment of Tax. — 

"(1) In general. — The tax imposed by this section shall be 
paid by the individual on whom the service is performed. 

"(2) Collection. — Every person receiving a payment for 
services on which a tax is imposed under subsection (a) shall 
collect the amount of the tax from the individual on whom the 
service is performed and remit such tax quarterly to the Sec- 
retary at such time and in such manner as provided by the 
Secretary. 

"(3) Secondary liability. — Where any tax imposed by 
subsection (a) is not paid at the time payments for indoor tan- 
ning services are made, then to the extent that such tax is not 
collected, such tax shall be paid by the person who performs 
the service.". 

(c) Clerical Amendment. — The table of chapter for subtitle D 
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended by this Act, is 
amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 48 the fol- 
lowing new item: 

"Chapter 49 — Cosmetic Services". 

(d) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to services performed on or after July 1, 2010. 

SEC. 10908. EXCLUSION FOR ASSISTANCE PROVIDED TO PARTICI- 
PANTS IN STATE STUDENT LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAMS 
FOR CERTAIN HEALTH PROFESSIONALS. 

(a) In General. — Paragraph (4) of section 108(f) of the Inter- 
nal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows: 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10909 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



924 



"(4) Payments under national health service corps 
loan repayment program and certain state loan repay- 
MENT programs. — In the case of an individual, gross income 
shall not include any amount received under section 338B(g) of 
the Public Health Service Act, under a State program de- 
scribed in section 3381 of such Act, or under any other State 
loan repayment or loan forgiveness program that is intended 
to provide for the increased availability of health care services 
in underserved or health professional shortage areas (as deter- 
mined by such State).". 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by this section 
shall apply to amounts received by an individual in taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 2008. 

SEC. 10909. EXPANSION OF ADOPTION CREDIT AND ADOPTION ASSIST- 
ANCE PROGRAMS. 

(a) Increase in Dollar Limitation. — 
(1) Adoption credit. — 

(A) In general. — Paragraph (1) of section 23(b) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to dollar limita- 
tion) is amended by striking "$10,000" and inserting 
"$13,170". 

(B) Child with special needs. — Paragraph (3) of sec- 
tion 23(a) of such Code (relating to $10,000 credit for adop- 
tion of child with special needs regardless of expenses) is 
amended — 

(i) in the text by striking "$10,000" and inserting 
"$13,170", and 

(ii) in the heading by striking "$io,ooo" and insert- 
ing "$13,170". 

(C) Conforming amendment to inflation adjust- 
ment. — Subsection (h) of section 23 of such Code (relating 
to adjustments for inflation) is amended to read as follows: 

"(h) Adjustments for Inflation. — 

"(1) Dollar limitations. — In the case of a taxable year 
beginning after December 31, 2010, each of the dollar amounts 
in subsections (a)(3) and (b)(1) shall be increased by an amount 
equal to — 

"(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by 
"(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under 
section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable 
year begins, determined by substituting 'calendar year 
2009' for 'calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof. 
If any amount as increased under the preceding sentence is not 
a multiple of $10, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest 
multiple of $10. 

"(2) Income limitation. — In the case of a taxable year be- 
ginning after December 31, 2002, the dollar amount in sub- 
section (b)(2)(A)(i) shall be increased by an amount equal to — 
"(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by 
"(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under 
section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable 
year begins, determined by substituting 'calendar year 
2001' for 'calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof. 

June 9, 2010 



925 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



Sec. 10909 



If any amount as increased under the preceding sentence is not 
a multiple of $10, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest 
multiple of $10.". 

(2) Adoption assistance programs. — 

(A) In general. — Paragraph (1) of section 137(b) of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to dollar limi- 
tation) is amended by striking "$10,000" and inserting 
"$13,170". 

(B) Child with special needs. — Paragraph (2) of sec- 
tion 137(a) of such Code (relating to $10,000 exclusion for 
adoption of child with special needs regardless of expenses) 
is amended — 

(i) in the text by striking "$10,000" and inserting 
"$13,170", and 

(ii) in the heading by striking "$io,ooo" and insert- 
ing "$13, 170". 

(C) Conforming amendment to inflation adjust- 
ment. — Subsection (f) of section 137 of such Code (relating 
to adjustments for inflation) is amended to read as follows: 

"(f) Adjustments for Inflation. — 

"(1) Dollar limitations. — In the case of a taxable year 
beginning after December 31, 2010, each of the dollar amounts 
in subsections (a)(2) and (b)(1) shall be increased by an amount 
equal to — 

"(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by 
"(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under 
section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable 
year begins, determined by substituting 'calendar year 
2009' for 'calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof. 
If any amount as increased under the preceding sentence is not 
a multiple of $10, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest 
multiple of $10. 

"(2) Income limitation. — In the case of a taxable year be- 
ginning after December 31, 2002, the dollar amount in sub- 
section (b)(2)(A) shall be increased by an amount equal to — 
"(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by 
"(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under 
section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable 
year begins, determined by substituting 'calendar year 
2001' for 'calendar year 1992' in subparagraph thereof. 
If any amount as increased under the preceding sentence is not 
a multiple of $10, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest 
multiple of $10.". 
(b) Credit Made Refundable. — 

(1) Credit moved to subpart relating to refundable 
credits. — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended — 

(A) by redesignating section 23, as amended by sub- 
section (a), as section 36C, and 

(B) by moving section 36C (as so redesignated) from 
subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 to the 
location immediately before section 37 in subpart C of part 
IV of subchapter A of chapter 1. 

(2) Conforming amendments. — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 10909 



PPACA (Consolidated) 



926 



(A) Section 24(b)(3)(B) of such Code is amended by 
striking "23,". 

(B) Section 25(e)(1)(C) of such Code is amended by 
striking "23," both places it appears. 

(C) Section 25A(i)(5)(B) of such Code is amended by 
striking "23, 25D," and inserting "25D". 

(D) Section 25B(g)(2) of such Code is amended by 
striking "23,". 

(E) Section 26(a)(1) of such Code is amended by strik- 
ing "23,". 

(F) Section 30(c)(2)(B)(ii) of such Code is amended by 
striking "23, 25D," and inserting "25D". 

(G) Section 30B(g)(2)(B)(ii) of such Code is amended by 
striking "23,". 

(H) Section 30D(c)(2)(B)(ii) of such Code is amended by 
striking "sections 23 and" and inserting "section". 

(I) Section 36C of such Code, as so redesignated, is 
amended — 

(i) by striking paragraph (4) of subsection (b), and 

(ii) by striking subsection (c). 

(J) Section 137 of such Code is amended — 

(i) by striking "section 23(d)" in subsection (d) and 
inserting "section 36C(d)", and 

(ii) by striking "section 23" in subsection (e) and 
inserting "section 36C". 

(K) Section 904(i) of such Code is amended by striking 
"23 " 

' (L) Section 1016(a)(26) is amended by striking "23(g)" 
and inserting "36C(g)". 

(M) Section 1400C(d) of such Code is amended by 
striking "23,". 

(N) Section 6211(b)(4)(A) of such Code is amended by 
inserting "36C," before "53(e)". 

(0) The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of 
subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code of 1986 is amended 
by striking the item relating to section 23. 

(P) Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United 
States Code, as amended by this Act, is amended by in- 
serting "36C," after "36B,". 

(Q) The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of 
subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986, as amended by this Act, is amended by inserting 
after the item relating to section 36B the following new 
item: 

"Sec. 36C. Adoption expenses.". 

(c) Application and Extension of EGTRRA Sunset. — Not- 
withstanding section 901 of the Economic Growth and Tax Relief 
Reconciliation Act of 2001, such section shall apply to the amend- 
ments made by this section and the amendments made by section 
202 of such Act by substituting "December 31, 2011" for "December 
31, 2010" in subsection (a)(1) thereof. 

(d) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2009. 

June 9, 2010 



[This is the text of the Health Care and Education Reconcili- 
ation Act of 2010 (Public Law 111-152) shown, in a manner similar 
to that of title X of PPACA above. Subtitle A of title II (relating to 
education) is not shown.~\ 

SEC. 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS. 

(a) Short Title. — This Act may be cited as the "Health Care 
and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010". 

(b) Table of Contents. — The table of contents of this Act is 
as follows: 

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents. 

TITLE I— COVERAGE, MEDICARE, MEDICAID, AND REVENUES 

Subtitle A — Coverage 

Sec. 1001. Tax credits [amendments fully incorporated into PPACA\. 

Sec. 1002. Individual responsibility [amendments fully incorporated into PPACA\. 

Sec. 1003. Employer responsibility [amendments fully incorporated into PPACA]. 

Sec. 1004. Income definitions. 

Sec. 1005. Implementation funding. 

Subtitle B— Medicare 

Sec. 1101. Closing the medicare prescription drug "donut hole" [substitutes for sec- 
tion 3315 of PPACA]. 

Sec. 1102. Medicare Advantage payments [substitutes for sections 3201 &amp; 3203 of 
PPACA]. 

Sec. 1103. Savings from limits on MA plan administrative costs. 

Sec. 1104. Disproportionate share hospital (DSH) payments [amendment fully in- 
corporated into PPACA]. 

Sec. 1105. Market basket updates [amendments fully incorporated into PPACA]. 

Sec. 1106. Physician ownership-referral [amendments fully incorporated into 
PPACA]. 

Sec. 1107. Payment for imaging services [amendments fully incorporated into 
PPACA]. 

Sec. 1108. PE GPCI adjustment for 2010 [amendment fully incorporated into 
PPACA]. 

Sec. 1109. Payment for qualifying hospitals. 

Subtitle C— Medicaid 

Sec. 1201. Federal funding for States [amendments fully incorporated into 
PPACA]. 

Sec. 1202. Payments to primary care physicians. 
Sec. 1203. Disproportionate share hospital payments. 
Sec. 1204. Funding for the territories. 

Sec. 1205. Delay in Community First Choice option [amendment fully incorporated 
into PPACA]. 

Sec. 1206. Drug rebates for new formulations of existing drugs [amendment fully 
incorporated into PPACA] . 

Subtitle D — Reducing Fraud, Waste, and Abuse 

Sec. 1301. Community mental health centers. 

Sec. 1302. Medicare prepayment medical review limitations. 

Sec. 1303. Funding to fight fraud, waste, and abuse. 

Sec. 1304. 90-day period of enhanced oversight for initial claims of DME suppliers 
[amendment fully incorporated into PPACA] . 

927 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1001 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



928 



Subtitle E — Provisions Relating to Revenue 

Sec. 1401. High-cost plan excise tax [amendments fully incorporated into PPACA\. 
Sec. 1402. Unearned income Medicare contribution. 

Sec. 1403. Delay of limitation on health flexible spending arrangements under cafe- 
teria plans [amendments fully incorporated into PPACA] . 

Sec. 1404. Brand name pharmaceuticals [amendments fully incorporated into 
PPACA}. 

Sec. 1405. Excise tax on medical device manufacturers [substitutes for section 9009 
of PPACA]. 

Sec. 1406. Health insurance providers [amendment fully incorporated into 
PPACA]. 

Sec. 1407. Delay of elimination of deduction for expenses allocable to medicare part 
D subsidy [amendment fully incorporated in PPACA]. 

Sec. 1408. Elimination of unintended application of cellulosic biofuel producer cred- 
it. 

Sec. 1409. Codification of economic substance doctrine and penalties. 
Sec. 1410. Time for payment of corporate estimated taxes. 

Subtitle F — Other Provisions 

Sec. 1501. Community college and career training grant program. 

TITLE II— EDUCATION AND HEALTH 

Subtitle A — Education [Omitted From This Compilation] 

Subtitle B— Health 

Sec. 2301. Insurance reforms [amendment fully incorporated into PPACA]. 
Sec. 2302. Drugs purchased by covered entities. 

Sec. 2303. Community health centers [amendment fully incorporated into PPACA]. 

TITLE I— COVERAGE, MEDICARE, 
MEDICAID, AND REVENUES 

Subtitle A — Coverage 

SEC. 1001. TAX CREDITS [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCORPORATED INTO 
PPACA]. 

(a) Premium Tax Credits. — [Amended section 36B of the IRC, 
as added by section 1401 (and amended by section 10105) of 
PPACA} 

(1) in subsection (b)(3)(A)— 

(A) [Amended clause (i) by inserting new matter, in- 
cluding a table} 

(B) [Struck clauses (ii) and (Hi) and inserted a new 
clause (ii)~\ 

(2) in subsection (c)(2)(C)— 

(A) [Amended percentages in clauses (i)(II) and (iv)~\ 

(B) [Amended clause (iv)~\. 

(b) Cost Sharing. — Section 1402(c) of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act is amended — 

(1) in paragraph (l)(B)(i) — 

(A) [Amended percentage in subclause (1)1; 

(B) [Amended percentage in subclause (77)] 

(C) [Struck subclause (III) and inserted new sub- 
clauses (III) and (PV)~\ 

(2) in paragraph (2) — 

(A) [Amended percentage in subparagraph (A)~\ 

(B) [Amended percentage in subparagraph (B)~\ 

June 9, 2010 



929 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



Sec. 1004 



(C) [Inserted a subparagraph (C)]". 

SEC. 1002. INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCOR- 
PORATED INTO PPACA], 

(a) Amounts. — Section 5000A(c) of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986, as added by section 1501(b) of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act and amended by section 10106 of such Act, is 
amended — 

(1) in paragraph (2)(B) — 

(A) [Amended matter before clause 

(B) [Amended percentage in clause 

(C) [Amended percentage in clause (ii)] 

(D) [Amended percentage in clause (Hi)] 

(2) [Amended dollar amounts in subparagraphs (A), (B), 
and (D) of paragraph (3)] 

(b) Threshold. — Section 5000A of such Code, as so added and 
amended, is amended — 

(1) [Struck subsection (c)(4)(D)~\ 

(2) [Amended subsection (e)(2)] 

SEC. 1003. EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITY [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCOR- 
PORATED INTO PPACA]. 

(a) Payment Calculation. — [Replaced section 4980H(d)(2)(D) 
of the IRC, as added by section 1513 (and amended by section 
10106) of PPACA, before redesignation by subsection (d)] 

(b) Applicable Payment Amount. — Section 4980H of such 
Code, as so added and amended, is amended — 

(1) [Amended flush text in subsection (c)(1), before redesig- 
nation by subsection (d)~\ 

(2) [Amended amount in subsection (d)(1), before redesig- 
nation by subsection (d)~\ 

(3) [Amended subsection (d)(5)(A), before redesignation by 
subsection (d)~\ 

(c) Counting Part-time Workers in Setting the Threshold 
for Employer Responsibility. — [Added a subparagraph (E) at 
the end of section 4980H(d)(2) of the IRC, as so added, before redes- 
ignation by subsection (d)~\ 

(d) Eliminating Waiting Period Assessment. — [Struck sub- 
section (b) of section 4980H of the IRC and redesignated succeeding 
subsections accordingly] 

SEC. 1004. INCOME DEFINITIONS. 

(a) Modified Adjusted Gross Income. — 

(1) In general. — [Amended section 36B(d)(2)(A)(i) &amp; (ii) of 
the IRC, added by section 1401 of PPACA, 6103(l)(21)(A)(iv) of 
IRC, added by section 1414 of PPACA, and 5000A(c)(4)[sic](i) 
&amp; (ii) of IRC, added by section 1501(b) of PPACA — executed as 
if referenced 5000A(c)(4)(B)1 

(2) Definition. — 

(A) [Replaced section 36(d)(2)(B) of IRC] 

(B) [Replaced section 5000A(c)(4)(C) of the IRC] 

(b) Modified Adjusted Gross Income Definition. — 

(1) Medicaid. — [Amended section 1902(e)(14) of the Social 
Security Act, added by section 2002(a) of PPACA, and 
1902(gg)(4)(A) of the SSA, added by section 2001(b) of PPACA] 

(2) Chip.— 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1004 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



930 



(A) State plan requirements. — [Amended section 
2102(b)(l)(B)(v) of the Social Security Act, added by section 
2101(d)(1) ofPPACAl. 

(B) Plan administration. — [Amended section 
2107(e)(1)(E) of the SSA, added by section 2101(d)(2) of 
PPACA] 

(c) No Excess Payments. — [Added paragraph (3) to section 
36B(f) of the IRC, added by section 1401(a) ofPPACA] 

(d) Adult Dependents. — 

(1) Exclusion of amounts expended for medical 
care. — The first sentence of section 105(b) of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986 (relating to amounts expended for medical 
care) is amended — 

(A) by striking "and his dependents" and inserting "his 
dependents"; and 

(B) by inserting before the period the following: ", and 
any child (as defined in section 152(f)(1)) of the taxpayer 
who as of the end of the taxable year has not attained age 
27". 

(2) Self-employed health insurance deduction. — Sec- 
tion 162(1)(1) of such Code is amended to read as follows: 

"(1) Allowance of deduction. — In the case of a taxpayer 
who is an employee within the meaning of section 401(c)(1), 
there shall be allowed as a deduction under this section an 
amount equal to the amount paid during the taxable year for 
insurance which constitutes medical care for — 
"(A) the taxpayer, 
"(B) the taxpayer's spouse, 
"(C) the taxpayer's dependents, and 
"(D) any child (as defined in section 152(f)(1)) of the 
taxpayer who as of the end of the taxable year has not at- 
tained age 27.". 

(3) Coverage under self-employed deduction. — Section 
162(1)(2)(B) of such Code is amended by inserting ", or any de- 
pendent, or individual described in subparagraph (D) of para- 
graph (1) with respect to," after "spouse of. 

(4) Sick and accident benefits provided to members of 
a voluntary employees' beneficiary association and their 
dependents. — Section 501(c)(9) of such Code is amended by 
adding at the end the following new sentence: "For purposes of 
providing for the payment of sick and accident benefits to 
members of such an association and their dependents, the term 
'dependent' shall include any individual who is a child (as de- 
fined in section 152(f)(1)) of a member who as of the end of the 
calendar year has not attained age 27.". 

(5) Medical and other benefits for retired employ- 
ees. — Section 401(h) of such Code is amended by adding at the 
end the following: "For purposes of this subsection, the term 
'dependent' shall include any individual who is a child (as de- 
fined in section 152(f)(1)) of a retired employee who as of the 
end of the calendar year has not attained age 27.". 

(e) Five Percent Income Disregard for Certain Individ- 
uals. — [Amended section 1902(e)(14) of the SSA, added by section 
2002(a) ofPPACA, including adding a subparagraph (I)~\ 

June 9, 2010 



931 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



Sec. 1101 



SEC. 1005. IMPLEMENTATION FUNDING. 

(a) In General. — There is hereby established a Health Insur- 
ance Reform Implementation Fund (referred to in this section as 
the "Fund") within the Department of Health and Human Services 
to carry out the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and 
this Act (and the amendments made by such Acts). 

(b) Funding. — There is appropriated to the Fund, out of any 
funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $1,000,000,000 
for Federal administrative expenses to carry out such Act (and the 
amendments made by such Acts). 

Subtitle B— Medicare 

SEC. 1101. CLOSING THE MEDICARE PRESCRIPTION DRUG "DONUT 

HOLETISUBSTITUTES FOR SECTION 3315 OF PPACA\. 

(a) Coverage Gap Rebate for 2010.— 

(1) In general— Section 1860D-42 of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-152) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new subsection: 

"(c) Coverage Gap Rebate for 2010. — 

"(1) In general. — In the case of an individual described in 
subparagraphs (A) through (D) of section 1860D-14A(g)(l) who 
as of the last day of a calendar quarter in 2010 has incurred 
costs for covered part D drugs so that the individual has ex- 
ceeded the initial coverage limit under section 1860D-2(b)(3) 
for 2010, the Secretary shall provide for payment from the 
Medicare Prescription Drug Account of $250 to the individual 
by not later than the 15th day of the third month following the 
end of such quarter. 

"(2) Limitation. — The Secretary shall provide only 1 pay- 
ment under this subsection with respect to any individual.". 

(2) Repeal of provision. — [Repealed section 3315 of 
PPACA~\ 

(b) Closing the Donut Hole.— Part D of title XVIII of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-101 et seq.), as amended by sec- 
tion 3301 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is fur- 
ther amended — 

(1) [Amended dates in section 1860D-43] 

(2) [Amended dates in section 1860D-14A] 

(3) in section 1860D-2(b)— 

(A) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking "The coverage" 
and inserting "Subject to subparagraphs (C) and (D), the 
coverage"; 

(B) in paragraph (2)(B), by striking "subparagraph 
(A)(ii)" and inserting "subparagraphs (A)(ii), (C), and (D)"; 

(C) by adding at the end of paragraph (2) the following 
new subparagraphs: 

"(C) Coverage for generic drugs in coverage 
gap.— 

"(i) In general. — Except as provided in para- 
graph (4), the coverage for an applicable beneficiary 
(as defined in section 1860D-14A(g)(l)) has coinsur- 
ance (for costs above the initial coverage limit under 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1101 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



932 



paragraph (3) and below the out-of-pocket threshold) 
for covered part D drugs that are not applicable drugs 
under section 1860D-14A(g)(2) that is— 

"(I) equal to the generic-gap coinsurance per- 
centage (specified in clause (ii)) for the year; or 

"(II) actuarially equivalent (using processes 
and methods established under section 1860D- 
11(c)) to an average expected payment of such per- 
centage of such costs for covered part D drugs 
that are not applicable drugs under section 
1860D-14A(g)(2). 

"(ii) Generic-gap coinsurance percentage. — 
The generic-gap coinsurance percentage specified in 
this clause for — 

"(I) 2011 is 93 percent; 

"(II) 2012 and each succeeding year before 
2020 is the generic-gap coinsurance percentage 
under this clause for the previous year decreased 
by 7 percentage points; and 

"(III) 2020 and each subsequent year is 25 
percent. 

"(D) Coverage for applicable drugs in coverage 
gap — 

"(i) In general. — Except as provided in para- 
graph (4), the coverage for an applicable beneficiary 
(as defined in section 1860D-14A(g)(l)) has coinsur- 
ance (for costs above the initial coverage limit under 
paragraph (3) and below the out-of-pocket threshold) 
for the negotiated price (as defined in section 1860D- 
14A(g)(6)) of covered part D drugs that are applicable 
drugs under section 1860D-14A(g)(2) that is — 

"(I) equal to the difference between the appli- 
cable gap percentage (specified in clause (ii) for 
the year) and the discount percentage specified in 
section 1860D-14A(g)(4)(A) for such applicable 
drugs; or 

"(II) actuarially equivalent (using processes 
and methods established under section 1860D- 
11(c)) to an average expected payment of such per- 
centage of such costs, for covered part D drugs 
that are applicable drugs under section 1860D- 
14A(g)(2). 

"(ii) Applicable gap percentage. — The applica- 
ble gap percentage specified in this clause for — 

"(I) 2013 and 2014 is 97.5 percent; 

"(II) 2015 and 2016 is 95 percent; 

"(III) 2017 is 90 percent; 

"(IV) 2018 is 85 percent; 

"(V) 2019 is 80 percent; and 

"(VI) 2020 and each subsequent year is 75 
percent."; 

(D) in paragraph (3)(A), as restored under subsection 
(a)(2), by striking "paragraph (4)" and inserting "para- 
graphs (2)(C), (2)(D), and (4)"; and 

June 9, 2010 



933 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



Sec. 1101 



(E) lAmends paragraph (4)(E)~\ 
(4) in section 1860D-22(a)(2)(A), by inserting before the 
period at the end the following: ", not taking into account the 
value of any discount or coverage provided during the gap in 
prescription drug coverage that occurs between the initial cov- 
erage limit under section 1860D-2(b)(3) during the year and 
the out-of-pocket threshold specified in section 1860D- 
2(b)(4)(B)". 

(c) Conforming Amendment to AMP Under Medicaid. — 
[Adds new subclause (V) to section 1927(k)(l)(B)(i) of the Social Se- 
curity Act , as amended by section 2503(a)(2)(B) of PPACA; error in 
subclause (IV) by only striking period and not inserting "; and"] 

(d) Reducing Growth Rate of Out-of-pocket Cost Thresh- 
old.— Section 1860D-2(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395w-102(b)) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (4)(B)(i) — 

(A) in subclause (I), by striking "or" at the end; 

(B) by redesignating subclause (II) as subclause (VI); 

and 

(C) by inserting after subclause (I) the following new 
subclauses: 

"(II) for each of years 2007 through 2013, is 
equal to the amount specified in this subpara- 
graph for the previous year, increased by the an- 
nual percentage increase described in paragraph 
(6) for the year involved; 

"(III) for 2014 and 2015, is equal to the 
amount specified in this subparagraph for the pre- 
vious year, increased by the annual percentage in- 
crease described in paragraph (6) for the year in- 
volved, minus 0.25 percentage point; 

"(IV) for each of years 2016 through 2019, is 
equal to the amount specified in this subpara- 
graph for the previous year, increased by the less- 
er of — 

"(aa) the annual percentage increase de- 
scribed in paragraph (7) for the year involved, 
plus 2 percentage points; or 

"(bb) the annual percentage increase de- 
scribed in paragraph (6) for the year; 
"(V) for 2020, is equal to the amount that 
would have been applied under this subparagraph 
for 2020 if the amendments made by section 
1101(d)(1) of the Health Care and Education Rec- 
onciliation Act of 2010 had not been enacted; or"; 
and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 

"(7) Additional annual percentage increase. — The an- 
nual percentage increase specified in this paragraph for a year 
is equal to the annual percentage increase in the consumer 
price index for all urban consumers (United States city aver- 
age) for the 12-month period ending in July of the previous 
year.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1102 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



934 



SEC. 1102. MEDICARE ADVANTAGE PAYMENTS [SUBSTITUTES FOR SEC- 
TION 3201 &amp; 3203 OF PPACA\. 

(a) Repeal.— [Repealed sections 3201 and 3203 of PPACA] 

(b) Phase-in of Modified Benchmarks. — Section 1853 of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-23) is amended— 

(1) in subsection (j)(l)(A), by striking "(or, beginning with 
2007, V12 of the applicable amount determined under sub- 
section (k)(l)) for the area for the year" and inserting "for the 
area for the year (or, for 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010, Via of the 
applicable amount determined under subsection (k)(l) for the 
area for the year; for 2011, Via of the applicable amount deter- 
mined under subsection (k)(l) for the area for 2010; and, begin- 
ning with 2012, Via of the blended benchmark amount deter- 
mined under subsection (n)(l) for the area for the year)"; and 

(2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: 
"(n) Determination of Blended Benchmark Amount. — 

"(1) In general. — For purposes of subsection (j), subject to 
paragraphs (3), (4), and (5), the term 'blended benchmark 
amount' means for an area — 

"(A) for 2012 the sum of— 

"(i) Va of the applicable amount for the area and 
year; and 

"(ii) V2 of the amount specified in paragraph (2)(A) 
for the area and year; and 

"(B) for a subsequent year the amount specified in 
paragraph (2)(A) for the area and year. 
"(2) Specified amount. — 

"(A) In general. — The amount specified in this sub- 
paragraph for an area and year is the product of — 

"(i) the base payment amount specified in sub- 
paragraph (E) for the area and year adjusted to take 
into account the phase-out in the indirect costs of med- 
ical education from capitation rates described in sub- 
section (k)(4); and 

"(ii) the applicable percentage for the area for the 
year specified under subparagraph (B). 
"(B) Applicable percentage. — Subject to subpara- 
graph (D), the applicable percentage specified in this sub- 
paragraph for an area for a year in the case of an area 
that is ranked — 

"(i) in the highest quartile under subparagraph 
(C) for the previous year is 95 percent; 

"(ii) in the second highest quartile under such 
subparagraph for the previous year is 100 percent; 

"(hi) in the third highest quartile under such sub- 
paragraph for the previous year is 107.5 percent; or 

"(iv) in the lowest quartile under such subpara- 
graph for the previous year is 115 percent. 
"(C) Periodic ranking. — For purposes of this para- 
graph in the case of an area located — 

"(i) in 1 of the 50 States or the District of Colum- 
bia, the Secretary shall rank such area in each year 
specified under subsection (c)(l)(D)(ii) based upon the 

June 9, 2010 



935 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



Sec. 1102 



level of the amount specified in subparagraph (A)(i) for 
such areas; or 

"(ii) in a territory, the Secretary shall rank such 
areas in each such year based upon the level of the 
amount specified in subparagraph (A)(i) for such area 
relative to quartile rankings computed under clause 
(i). 

"(D) 1-YEAR TRANSITION FOR CHANGES IN APPLICABLE 

percentage. — If, for a year after 2012, there is a change 
in the quartile in which an area is ranked compared to the 
previous year, the applicable percentage for the area in the 
year shall be the average of — 

"(i) the applicable percentage for the area for the 
previous year; and 

"(ii) the applicable percentage that would other- 
wise apply for the area for the year. 
"(E) Base payment amount. — Subject to subpara- 
graph (F), the base payment amount specified in this sub- 
paragraph — 

"(i) for 2012 is the amount specified in subsection 
(c)(1)(D) for the area for the year; or 
"(ii) for a subsequent year that — 

"(I) is not specified under subsection 
(c)(l)(D)(ii), is the base amount specified in this 
subparagraph for the area for the previous year, 
increased by the national per capita MA growth 
percentage, described in subsection (c)(6) for that 
succeeding year, but not taking into account any 
adjustment under subparagraph (C) of such sub- 
section for a year before 2004; and 

"(II) is specified under subsection (c)(l)(D)(ii), 
is the amount specified in subsection (c)(1)(D) for 
the area for the year. 
"(F) Application of indirect medical education 
phase-out. — The base payment amount specified in sub- 
paragraph (E) for a year shall be adjusted in the same 
manner under paragraph (4) of subsection (k) as the appli- 
cable amount is adjusted under such subsection. 
"(3) Alternative phase-ins. — 

"(A) 4-year phase-in for certain areas. — If the dif- 
ference between the applicable amount (as denned in sub- 
section (k)) for an area for 2010 and the projected 2010 
benchmark amount (as defined in subparagraph (C)) for 
the area is at least $30 but less than $50, the blended 
benchmark amount for the area is — 
"(i) for 2012 the sum of— 

"(I) 3 A of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

"(II) Y4 of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; 
"(ii) for 2013 the sum of— 

"(I) Yz of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1102 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



936 



"(II) Yz of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; 
"(hi) for 2014 the sum of— 

"(I) Y± of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

"(II) 3 A of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; and 
"(iv) for a subsequent year the amount specified in 
paragraph (2)(A) for the area and year. 
"(B) 6-year phase-in for certain areas. — If the dif- 
ference between the applicable amount (as defined in sub- 
section (k)) for an area for 2010 and the projected 2010 
benchmark amount (as defined in subparagraph (Q) for 
the area is at least $50, the blended benchmark amount 
for the area is — 

"(i) for 2012 the sum of— 

"(I) % of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

"(II) Ye of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; 
"(ii) for 2013 the sum of— 

"(I) % of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

"(II) Ys of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; 
"(hi) for 2014 the sum of— 

"(I) Yz of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

"(II) Yz of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; 
"(iv) for 2015 the sum of— 

"(I) Yz of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

"(II) % of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; and 
"(v) for 2016 the sum of— 

"(I) Ye of the applicable amount for the area 
and year; and 

"(II) % of the amount specified in paragraph 
(2)(A) for the area and year; and 
"(vi) for a subsequent year the amount specified in 
paragraph (2)(A) for the area and year. 
"(C) Projected 2010 benchmark amount. — The pro- 
jected 2010 benchmark amount described in this subpara- 
graph for an area is equal to the sum of — 

"(i) Yz of the applicable amount (as defined in sub- 
section (k)) for the area for 2010; and 

"(ii) Yz of the amount specified in paragraph (2)(A) 
for the area for 2010 but determined as if there were 
substituted for the applicable percentage specified in 
clause (ii) of such paragraph the sum of — 

"(I) the applicable percent that would be spec- 
ified under subparagraph (B) of paragraph (2) (de- 
termined without regard to subparagraph (D) of 

June 9, 2010 



937 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



Sec. 1102 



such paragraph) for the area for 2010 if any ref- 
erence in such paragraph to 'the previous year' 
were deemed a reference to 2010; and 

"(II) the applicable percentage increase that 
would apply to a qualifying plan in the area under 
subsection (o) as if any reference in such sub- 
section to 2012 were deemed a reference to 2010 
and as if the determination of a qualifying county 
under paragraph (3)(B) of such subsection were 
made for 2010. 

"(4) Cap on benchmark amount. — In no case shall the 
blended benchmark amount for an area for a year (determined 
taking into account subsection (o)) be greater than the applica- 
ble amount that would (but for the application of this sub- 
section) be determined under subsection (k)(l) for the area for 
the year. 

"(5) Non-application to pace plans. — This subsection 
shall not apply to payments to a PACE program under section 
1894.". 

(c) Applicable Percentage Quality Increases. — Section 
1853 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-23), as amended by subsection 
(b), is amended — 

(1) in subsection (j), by inserting "subject to subsection (o)," 
after "For purposes of this part,"; 

(2) in subsection (n)(2)(B), as added by subsection (b), by 
inserting ", subject to subsection (o)" after "as follows"; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following new subsection: 
"(o) Applicable Percentage Quality Increases. — 

"(1) In general. — Subject to the succeeding paragraphs, in 
the case of a qualifying plan with respect to a year beginning 
with 2012, the applicable percentage under subsection (n)(2)(B) 
shall be increased on a plan or contract level, as determined 
by the Secretary — 

"(A) for 2012, by 1.5 percentage points; 
"(B) for 2013, by 3.0 percentage points; and 
"(C) for 2014 or a subsequent year, by 5.0 percentage 
points. 

"(2) Increase for qualifying plans in qualifying coun- 
ties. — The increase applied under paragraph (1) for a quali- 
fying plan located in a qualifying county for a year shall be 
doubled. 

"(3) Qualifying plans and qualifying county defined; 
application of increases to low enrollment and new 
plans. — For purposes of this subsection: 
"(A) Qualifying plan. — 

"(i) In general. — The term 'qualifying plan' 
means, for a year and subject to paragraph (4), a plan 
that had a quality rating under paragraph (4) of 4 
stars or higher based on the most recent data avail- 
able for such year. 

"(ii) Application of increases to low enroll- 
ment plans. — 

"(I) 2012.— For 2012, the term 'qualifying 
plan' includes an MA plan that the Secretary de- 
June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1102 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



938 



termines is not able to have a quality rating 
under paragraph (4) because of low enrollment. 

"(II) 2013 AND SUBSEQUENT YEARS— For 2013 
and subsequent years, for purposes of determining 
whether an MA plan with low enrollment (as de- 
fined by the Secretary) is included as a qualifying 
plan, the Secretary shall establish a method to 
apply to MA plans with low enrollment (as defined 
by the Secretary) the computation of quality rat- 
ing and the rating system under paragraph (4). 
"(hi) Application of increases to new plans. — 

"(I) In general. — A new MA plan that meets 
criteria specified by the Secretary shall be treated 
as a qualifying plan, except that in applying para- 
graph (1), the applicable percentage under sub- 
section (n)(2)(B) shall be increased — 

"(aa) for 2012, by 1.5 percentage points; 
"(bb) for 2013, by 2.5 percentage points; 

and 

"(cc) for 2014 or a subsequent year, by 3.5 
percentage points. 

"(II) New ma plan defined. — The term 'new 
MA plan' means, with respect to a year, a plan of- 
fered by an organization or sponsor that has not 
had a contract as a Medicare Advantage organiza- 
tion in the preceding 3-year period. 
"(B) Qualifying county. — The term 'qualifying coun- 
ty' means, for a year, a county — 

"(i) that has an MA capitation rate that, in 2004, 
was based on the amount specified in subsection 
(c)(1)(B) for a Metropolitan Statistical Area with a 
population of more than 250,000; 

"(ii) for which, as of December 2009, of the Medi- 
care Advantage eligible individuals residing in the 
county at least 25 percent of such individuals were en- 
rolled in Medicare Advantage plans; and 

"(hi) that has per capita fee-for-service spending 
that is lower than the national monthly per capita cost 
for expenditures for individuals enrolled under the 
original medicare fee-for-service program for the year. 
"(4) Quality determinations for application of in- 
crease. — 

"(A) Quality determination. — The quality rating for 
a plan shall be determined according to a 5-star rating sys- 
tem (based on the data collected under section 1852(e)). 

"(B) Plans that failed to report. — An MA plan 
which does not report data that enables the Secretary to 
rate the plan for purposes of this paragraph shall be 
counted as having a rating of fewer than 3.5 stars. 
"(5) Exception for pace plans. — This subsection shall not 
apply to payments to a PACE program under section 1894.". 

(4) Determination of medicare part d low-income 
BENCHMARK PREMIUM. — [Amended section 1860D- 
14(b)(2)(B)(iii) of SSA, as amended by section 3302 of PPACA] 

June 9, 2010 



939 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



Sec. 1103 



(d) Beneficiary Rebates. — Section 1854(b)(1)(C) of such Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-24(b)(l)(C)), as amended by section 3202(b) of 
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is further amend- 
ed— 

(1) in clause (i), by inserting "(or the applicable rebate per- 
centage specified in clause (hi) in the case of plan years begin- 
ning on or after January 1, 2012)" after "75 percent"; and 

(2) [Struck clause (Hi), redesignated clauses (iv) and (v) as 
clauses (vii) and (viii), respectively, and inserted in new clauses 
(Hi) through (vi)~\". 

(e) Coding Intensity Adjustment. — Section 1853(a)(l)(C)(ii) 
of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-23(a)(l)(C)(ii)) is amended— 

(1) in the heading, by striking "during phaseout of 
budget neutrality factor" and inserting "of coding ad- 
justment"; 

(2) in the matter before subclause (I), by striking "through 
2010" and inserting "and each subsequent year"; and 

(3) in subclause (II) — 

(A) in the first sentence, by inserting "annually" before 
"conduct an analysis"; 

(B) in the second sentence — 

(i) by inserting "on a timely basis" after "are incor- 
porated"; and 

(ii) by striking "only for 2008, 2009, and 2010" and 
inserting "for 2008 and subsequent years"; 

(C) in the third sentence, by inserting "and updated as 
appropriate" before the period at the end; and 

(D) by adding at the end the following new subclauses: 

"(III) In calculating each year's adjustment, 
the adjustment factor shall be for 2014, not less 
than the adjustment factor applied for 2010, plus 
1.3 percentage points; for each of years 2015 
through 2018, not less than the adjustment factor 
applied for the previous year, plus 0.25 percentage 
point; and for 2019 and each subsequent year, not 
less than 5.7 percent. 

"(IV) Such adjustment shall be applied to risk 
scores until the Secretary implements risk adjust- 
ment using Medicare Advantage diagnostic, cost, 
and use data.". 

(f) Repeal of Comparative Cost Adjustment Program. — 
Section 1860C-1 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-29), 
as added by section 241(a) of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Im- 
provement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173), 
is repealed. 

SEC. 1103. SAVINGS FROM LIMITS ON MA PLAN ADMINISTRATIVE 
COSTS. 

Section 1857(e) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w- 
27(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following new para- 
graph: 

"(4) Requirement for minimum medical loss ratio. — If 
the Secretary determines for a contract year (beginning with 
2014) that an MA plan has failed to have a medical loss ratio 
of at least .85 — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1104 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



940 



"(A) the MA plan shall remit to the Secretary an 
amount equal to the product of — 

"(i) the total revenue of the MA plan under this 
part for the contract year; and 

"(ii) the difference between .85 and the medical 
loss ratio; 

"(B) for 3 consecutive contract years, the Secretary 
shall not permit the enrollment of new enrollees under the 
plan for coverage during the second succeeding contract 
year; and 

"(C) the Secretary shall terminate the plan contract if 
the plan fails to have such a medical loss ratio for 5 con- 
secutive contract years.". 

SEC. 1104. DISPROPORTIONATE SHARE HOSPITAL (DSH) PAYMENTS 

[AMENDMENT FULLY INCORPORATED INTO PPACA]. 

[Amended section 1886(r) of the SSA, as added by section 3133 
(and amended by section 10316) of PPACA)] 

SEC. 1105. MARKET BASKET UPDATES [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCOR- 
PORATED INTO PPACA]. 

(a) IPPS.— [Amended section 1886(b)(3)(B) of the Social Secu- 
rity Act, as amended by sections 3401(a)(4) and 10319(a) of PPACA, 
by substituting subclauses (III)-(V) of clause (xii) for previous sub- 
clause (III) and striking clause (xiii)] 

(b) Long-term Care Hospitals. — [Amended section 
1886(m)(4) of the Social Security Act, as added by section 3401(c) 
(and amended by section 10319(b)) of PPACA, by striking subpara- 
graph (B), redesignating clauses in subparagraph (A), and by sub- 
stituting subparagraphs (C)-(E) for clauses (iii)-(v) of previous sub- 
paragraph (A)~\ 

(c) Inpatient Rehabilitation Facilities. — [Amended section 
1886(j)(3)(D) of the Social Security Act, as added by section 
3401(d)(2) (and amended by section 10319(c)) of PPACA, by striking 
clause (ii), redesignating subclauses in clause (i), and by sub- 
stituting clauses (iii)-(v) for subclauses (III)(-(V) of previous clause 

m 

(d) Psychiatric Hospitals— [Amended section 1886(s)(3) of 
the Social Security Act, as added by section 3401(f) (and amended 
by section 10319(e)) of PPACA, by striking subparagraph (B), redes- 
ignating clauses in subparagraph (A), and by substituting subpara- 
graphs (C)-(E) for clauses (iii)-(v) of previous subparagraph (A)~\ 

(e) Outpatient Hospitals. — [Amended section 1833(t)(3)(G) of 
the Social Security Act, as added by section 3401(i)(2) (and amend- 
ed by section 10319(g)) of PPACA, by striking clause (ii), redesig- 
nating subclauses in clause (i), and by substituting clauses (iii)-(v) 
for subclauses (III)-(V) of previous clause (i)~\ 

SEC. 1106. PHYSICIAN OWNERSHIP-REFERRAL [AMENDMENTS FULLY 
INCORPORATED INTO PPACA]. 

Section 1877(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395nn(i)), 
as added by section 6001(a)(3) of the Patient Protection and Afford- 
able Care Act and as amended by section 10601(a) of such Act, is 
amended — 

(1) [Amended paragraph (l)(A)(i)~\ 

June 9, 2010 



941 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



Sec. 1201 



(2) [Amended paragraph (2) in subparagraphs (A)(i), 
(C)(iii), redesignated subparagraphs, and inserted new sub- 
paragraph (F)2 

SEC. 1107. PAYMENT FOR IMAGING SERVICES [AMENDMENTS FULLY 
INCORPORATED INTO PPACA\. 

Section 1848 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4), as 
amended by section 3135(a) of the Patient Protection and Afford- 
able Care Act, is amended — 

(1) [Amended subsection (b)(4) by amending subparagraph 
(B) and replacing subparagraph (C)~\ 

(2) [Amended subsection (c)(2)(B)(v) by substituting a new 
subclause (III) for subclauses (III), (IV), and (V)~\ 

SEC. 1108. PE GPCI ADJUSTMENT FOR 2010 [AMENDMENT FULLY INCOR- 
PORATED INTO PPACA1. 

[Amended section 1848(e)(l)(H)(i) of the Social Security Act, as 
added by section 3102(b)(2) ofPPACA] 

SEC. 1109 [42 U.S.C. 1395ww note]. PAYMENT FOR QUALIFYING HOS- 
PITALS. 

(a) In General. — From the amount available under subsection 
(b), the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide for 
a payment to qualifying hospitals (as defined in subsection (d)) for 
fiscal years 2011 and 2012 of the amount determined under sub- 
section (c). 

(b) Amounts Available. — There shall be available from the 
Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund $400,000,000 for payments 
under this section for fiscal years 2011 and 2012. 

(c) Payment Amount. — The amount of payment under this sec- 
tion for a qualifying hospital shall be determined, in a manner con- 
sistent with the amount available under subsection (b), in propor- 
tion to the portion of the amount of the aggregate payments under 
section 1886(d) of the Social Security Act to the hospital for fiscal 
year 2009 bears to the sum of all such payments to all qualifying 
hospitals for such fiscal year. 

(d) Qualifying Hospital Defined. — In this section, the term 
"qualifying hospital" means a subsection (d) hospital (as defined for 
purposes of section 1886(d) of the Social Security Act) that is lo- 
cated in a county that ranks, based upon its ranking in age, sex, 
and race adjusted spending for benefits under parts A and B under 
title XVIII of such Act per enrollee, within the lowest quartile of 
such counties in the United States. 

Subtitle C— Medicaid 

SEC. 1201. FEDERAL FUNDING FOR STATES [AMENDMENTS FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED INTO PPACA], 

Section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d), as 
amended by sections 2001(a)(3) and 10201(c) of the Patient Protec- 
tion and Affordable Care Act, is amended — 
(1) in subsection (y) — 

(A) by redesignating subclause (II) of paragraph 
(l)(B)(ii) as paragraph (5) of subsection (z) and realigning 
the left margins accordingly [see subsection (z) in section 
10201(c), p. 8401; and 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1202 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



942 



(B) [Replaced paragraph 
(2) in subsection (z) — 

(A) [Amended paragraph 

(B) [Struck paragraphs (2) through (4) and inserted a 
new paragraph (2)~\ 

(C) by redesignating paragraph (5) (as added by para- 
graph (1)(A) of this section) as paragraph (3), realigning 
the left margins to align with paragraph (2), and striking 
the heading and all that follows through "a State is" and 
inserting "A State is". 

SEC. 1202. PAYMENTS TO PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIANS. 

(a) In General. — 

(1) Fee-for-service payments. — Section 1902 of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a), as amended by section 
2303(a)(2) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is 
amended — 

(A) in subsection (a)(13) — 

(i) by striking "and" at the end of subparagraph 

(A) ; 

(ii) by adding "and" at the end of subparagraph 

(B) ; and 

(iii) by adding at the end the following new sub- 
paragraph: 

"(C) payment for primary care services (as defined in 
subsection (jj)) furnished in 2013 and 2014 by a physician 
with a primary specialty designation of family medicine, 
general internal medicine, or pediatric medicine at a rate 
not less than 100 percent of the payment rate that applies 
to such services and physician under part B of title XVIII 
(or, if greater, the payment rate that would be applicable 
under such part if the conversion factor under section 
1848(d) for the year involved were the conversion factor 
under such section for 2009);"; and 

(B) by adding at the end the following new subsection: 
"(jj) Primary Care Services Defined. — For purposes of sub- 
section (a)(13)(C), the term 'primary care services' means — 

"(1) evaluation and management services that are proce- 
dure codes (for services covered under title XVIII) for services 
in the category designated Evaluation and Management in the 
Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (established by 
the Secretary under section 1848(c)(5) as of December 31, 2009, 
and as subsequently modified); and 

"(2) services related to immunization administration for 
vaccines and toxoids for which CPT codes 90465, 90466, 90467, 
90468, 90471, 90472, 90473, or 90474 (as subsequently modi- 
fied) apply under such System.". 

(2) Under medicaid managed care plans. — Section 
1932(f) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-2(f)) is amended— 

(A) in the heading, by adding at the end the following: 
"; Adequacy of Payment for Primary Care Services"; 
and 

(B) by inserting before the period at the end the fol- 
lowing: "and, in the case of primary care services described 

June 9, 2010 



943 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



Sec. 1204 



in section 1902(a)(13)(C), consistent with the minimum 
payment rates specified in such section (regardless of the 
manner in which such payments are made, including in 
the form of capitation or partial capitation)", 
(b) Increase in Payment Using Increased FMAP. — Section 
1905 of the Social Security Act, as amended by section 1004(b) of 
this Act and section 10201(c)(6) of the Patient Protection and Af- 
fordable Care Act, is amended by adding at the end the following 
new subsection: 

"(dd) Increased FMAP for Additional Expenditures for 
Primary Care Services. — Notwithstanding subsection (b), with re- 
spect to the portion of the amounts expended for medical assistance 
for services described in section 1902(a)(13)(C) furnished on or after 
January 1, 2013, and before January 1, 2015, that is attributable 
to the amount by which the minimum payment rate required under 
such section (or, by application, section 1932(f)) exceeds the pay- 
ment rate applicable to such services under the State plan as of 
July 1, 2009, the Federal medical assistance percentage for a State 
that is one of the 50 States or the District of Columbia shall be 
equal to 100 percent. The preceding sentence does not prohibit the 
payment of Federal financial participation based on the Federal 
medical assistance percentage for amounts in excess of those speci- 
fied in such sentence.". 

SEC. 1203. DISPROPORTIONATE SHARE HOSPITAL PAYMENTS. 

(a) In General. — Section 1923(f) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396r-4(f)), as amended by sections 2551(a)(4) and 
10201(e)(1) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is 
amended — 

(1) in paragraph (6)(B)(iii), in the matter preceding sub- 
clause (I), by striking "or paragraph (7)"; and 

(2) [Replaced paragraph (7)~\ 

(b) Extension of DSH Allotment. — Section 1923(f)(6)(A) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-4(f)(6)(A)) is amended by 
adding at the end the following: 

"(v) Allotment for 2D, 3rd, and 4th quarters 
of fiscal year 2012 and for fiscal year 2013. — Not- 
withstanding the table set forth in paragraph (2): 

"(I) 2D, 3RD, AND 4TH QUARTERS OF FISCAL 

year 2012. — In the case of a State that has a DSH 
allotment of $0 for the 2d, 3rd, and 4th quarters 
of fiscal year 2012, the DSH allotment shall be 
$47,200,000 for such quarters. 

"(II) Fiscal year 2013. — In the case of a State 
that has a DSH allotment of $0 for fiscal year 
2013, the DSH allotment shall be $53,100,000 for 
such fiscal year.". 

SEC. 1204. FUNDING FOR THE TERRITORIES. 

(a) In General. — [Inserted a new section 1323 relating to 
funding for the territories] 

(b) Medicaid Funding. — 

(1) Increase in funding caps. — Section 1108(g) of the So- 
cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1308(g)), as amended by section 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1205 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



944 



2005(a) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is 
amended — 

(A) in paragraph (2), by inserting "and section 
1323(a)(2) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act" after "subject to"; and 

(B) [Replaced paragraph (5)~\ 

(2) Disregard of payments; increased fmap. — Section 
2005 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act is 
amended — 

(A) by repealing subsection (b) (and the amendments 
made by that subsection) and section 1108(g)(4) of the So- 
cial Security Act shall be applied as if such amendments 
had never been enacted; and 

(B) [Amended subsection (c)(2)~\ 

SEC. 1205. DELAY IN COMMUNITY FIRST CHOICE OPTION [AMEND- 
MENT FULLY INCORPORATED INTO PPACA]. 

[Amended section 1915(k)(l) of the Social Security Act, as 
added by section 2401 ofPPACA] 

SEC. 1206. DRUG REBATES FOR NEW FORMULATIONS OF EXISTING 
DRUGS [AMENDMENT FULLY INCORPORATED INTO PPACA\. 

(a) Treatment of New Formulations. — [Replaced subpara- 
graph (C) of section 1927(c)(2) of the Social Security Act, as added 
by section 2501(d)(1) ofPPACA] 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by subsection (a) 
shall take effect as if included in the enactment of the Patient Pro- 
tection and Affordable Care Act. 

Subtitle D — Reducing Fraud, Waste, and 

Abuse 

SEC. 1301. COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH CENTERS. 

(a) In General.— Section 1861(ff)(3)(B) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(ff)(3)(B)) is amended— 

(1) in clause (ii), by striking "and" at the end; 

(2) by redesignating clause (hi) as clause (iv); and 

(3) by inserting after clause (ii) the following: 

"(hi) provides at least 40 percent of its services to individ- 
uals who are not eligible for benefits under this title; and". 

(b) Restriction.— Section 1861(ff)(3)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395x(ff)(3)(A)) is amended by inserting "other than in an individ- 
ual's home or in an inpatient or residential setting" before the pe- 
riod. 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to items and services furnished on or after the first day 
of the first calendar quarter that begins at least 12 months after 
the date of the enactment of this Act. 

SEC. 1302. MEDICARE PREPAYMENT MEDICAL REVIEW LIMITATIONS. 

Section 1874A(h) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w- 
3a(h)) is repealed. 

SEC. 1303. FUNDING TO FIGHT FRAUD, WASTE, AND ABUSE. 

(a) Funding to Fight Fraud, Waste, and Abuse. — 

June 9, 2010 



945 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



Sec. 1401 



(1) In general. — Section 1817(k) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395i(k)), as amended by section 6402(i) of the Pa- 
tient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is further amended — 

(A) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 
"(8) Additional funding. — 

"(A) In general. — In addition to the funds otherwise 
appropriated to the Account from the Trust Fund under 
paragraphs (3)(C) and (4)(A) and for purposes described in 
paragraphs (3)(C) and (4)(A), there are hereby appro- 
priated to such Account from such Trust Fund the fol- 
lowing additional amounts: 

"(i) For fiscal year 2011, $95,000,000. 

"(ii) For fiscal year 2012, $55,000,000. 

"(hi) For each of fiscal years 2013 and 2014, 
$30,000,000. 

"(iv) For each of fiscal years 2015 and 2016, 
$20,000,000. 

"(B) Allocation. — The funds appropriated under this 
paragraph shall be allocated in the same proportion as the 
total funding appropriated with respect to paragraphs 
(3)(A) and (4)(A) was allocated with respect to fiscal year 
2010, and shall be available without further appropriation 
until expended."; and 

(B) in paragraph (4)(A), by inserting "for activities de- 
scribed in paragraph (3)(C) and" after "necessary". 

(b) Medicaid Integrity Program. — Section 1936(e)(1) of such 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396-u6(e)(l)) is amended— 

(1) in subparagraph (B), by striking at the end "and"; 

(2) in subparagraph (C) — 

(A) by striking "for each fiscal year thereafter" and in- 
serting "for each of fiscal years 2009 and 2010"; and 

(B) by striking the period and inserting "; and"; and 

(3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: 

"(D) for each fiscal year after fiscal year 2010, the 
amount appropriated under this paragraph for the pre- 
vious fiscal year, increased by the percentage increase in 
the consumer price index for all urban consumers (all 
items; United States city average) over the previous year.". 

SEC. 1304. 90-DAY PERIOD OF ENHANCED OVERSIGHT FOR INITIAL 
CLAIMS OF DME SUPPLIERS [AMENDMENT FULLY INCOR- 
PORATED INTO PPACA], 

[Inserted new paragraph (4) in section 1866(j) of the Social Se- 
curity Act, as amended by section 640T\ 

Subtitle E — Provisions Relating to 
Revenue 

SEC. 1401. HIGH-COST PLAN EXCISE TAX [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCOR- 
PORATED INTO PPACA]. 

(a) In General. — Section 49801 of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986, as added by section 9001 of the Patient Protection and Af- 
fordable Care Act and amended by section 10901 of such Act, is 
amended — 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1402 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



946 



(1) [Added a clause (ii) to subsection (b)(3)(B)] 

(2) [Amended subsection (b)(3)(C), including insertion of 
new clauses (ii) and (Hi)] 

(3) [Struck subparagraph (D) of subsection (b)(3)] 

(4) [Inserted new clause (ii) in subsection (d)(1)(B)] 

(5) [Added a paragraph (3) at end of subsection (d)] 
(b) Effective Dates. — 

(1) [Amended section 9001(c) ofPPACA] 

(2) [Amended section 10901(c) ofPPACA] 

SEC. 1402. UNEARNED INCOME MEDICARE CONTRIBUTION. 

(a) Investment Income. — 

(1) In general. — Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986 is amended by inserting after chapter 2 the following 
new chapter: 

"CHAPTER 2A— UNEARNED INCOME MEDICARE 
CONTRIBUTION 

"Sec. 1411. Imposition of tax. 
"SEC. 1411. IMPOSITION OF TAX. 

"(a) In General. — Except as provided in subsection (e) — 

"(1) Application to individuals. — In the case of an indi- 
vidual, there is hereby imposed (in addition to any other tax 
imposed by this subtitle) for each taxable year a tax equal to 
3.8 percent of the lesser of — 

"(A) net investment income for such taxable year, or 
"(B) the excess (if any) of — 

"(i) the modified adjusted gross income for such 
taxable year, over 

"(ii) the threshold amount. 
"(2) Application to estates and trusts. — In the case of 
an estate or trust, there is hereby imposed (in addition to any 
other tax imposed by this subtitle) for each taxable year a tax 
of 3.8 percent of the lesser of — 

"(A) the undistributed net investment income for such 
taxable year, or 

"(B) the excess (if any) of — 

"(i) the adjusted gross income (as denned in sec- 
tion 67(e)) for such taxable year, over 

"(ii) the dollar amount at which the highest tax 
bracket in section 1(e) begins for such taxable year. 
"(b) Threshold Amount. — For purposes of this chapter, the 
term 'threshold amount' means — 

"(1) in the case of a taxpayer making a joint return under 
section 6013 or a surviving spouse (as denned in section 2(a)), 
$250,000, 

"(2) in the case of a married taxpayer (as defined in section 
7703) filing a separate return, Y2 of the dollar amount deter- 
mined under paragraph (1), and 

"(3) in any other case, $200,000. 
"(c) Net Investment Income. — For purposes of this chapter — 

"(1) In general. — The term 'net investment income' means 
the excess (if any) of — 

"(A) the sum of— 

June 9, 2010 



947 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION Sec. 1402X141 1 IRC 



"(i) gross income from interest, dividends, annu- 
ities, royalties, and rents, other than such income 
which is derived in the ordinary course of a trade or 
business not described in paragraph (2), 

"(ii) other gross income derived from a trade or 
business described in paragraph (2), and 

"(hi) net gain (to the extent taken into account in 
computing taxable income) attributable to the disposi- 
tion of property other than property held in a trade or 
business not described in paragraph (2), over 
"(B) the deductions allowed by this subtitle which are 
properly allocable to such gross income or net gain. 
"(2) Trades and businesses to which tax applies. — A 
trade or business is described in this paragraph if such trade 
or business is — 

"(A) a passive activity (within the meaning of section 
469) with respect to the taxpayer, or 

"(B) a trade or business of trading in financial instru- 
ments or commodities (as defined in section 475(e)(2)). 
"(3) Income on investment of working capital subject 
to tax. — A rule similar to the rule of section 469(e)(1)(B) shall 
apply for purposes of this subsection. 

"(4) Exception for certain active interests in part- 
nerships and s corporations. — In the case of a disposition of 
an interest in a partnership or S corporation — 

"(A) gain from such disposition shall be taken into ac- 
count under clause (iii) of paragraph (1)(A) only to the ex- 
tent of the net gain which would be so taken into account 
by the transferor if all property of the partnership or S 
corporation were sold for fair market value immediately 
before the disposition of such interest, and 

"(B) a rule similar to the rule of subparagraph (A) 
shall apply to a loss from such disposition. 
"(5) Exception for distributions from qualified 
PLANS. — The term 'net investment income' shall not include 
any distribution from a plan or arrangement described in sec- 
tion 401(a), 403(a), 403(b), 408, 408A, or 457(b). 

"(6) Special rule. — Net investment income shall not in- 
clude any item taken into account in determining self-employ- 
ment income for such taxable year on which a tax is imposed 
by section 1401(b). 

"(d) Modified Adjusted Gross Income. — For purposes of this 
chapter, the term 'modified adjusted gross income' means adjusted 
gross income increased by the excess of — 

"(1) the amount excluded from gross income under section 

911(a)(1), over 

"(2) the amount of any deductions (taken into account in 
computing adjusted gross income) or exclusions disallowed 
under section 911(d)(6) with respect to the amounts described 
in paragraph (1). 

"(e) Nonapplication of Section. — This section shall not apply 

to— 

"(1) a nonresident alien, or 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1402 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



948 



"(2) a trust all of the unexpired interests in which are de- 
voted to one or more of the purposes described in section 
170(c)(2)(B).". 

(2) Estimated taxes. — Section 6654 of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986 is amended — 

(A) in subsection (a), by striking "and the tax under 
chapter 2" and inserting "the tax under chapter 2, and the 
tax under chapter 2A"; and 

(B) in subsection (f) — 

(i) by striking "minus" at the end of paragraph (2) 
and inserting "plus"; and 

(ii) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph 
(4) and inserting after paragraph (2) the following new 
paragraph: 

"(3) the taxes imposed by chapter 2A, minus". 

(3) Clerical amendment. — The table of chapters for sub- 
title A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is 
amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 2 the 
following new item: 

"Chapter 2A — Unearned Income Medicare Contribution". 

(4) Effective dates. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 
31, 2012. 

(b) Earned Income. — 
Threshold 

(A) FICA.— [Amended section 3101(b)(2) of the IRC, as 
added by section 9015 (and amended by section 10906) of 
PPACA, including inserting a new subparagraph (B)~\ 

(B) SECA.— [Amended section 1401(b)(2) of the IRC, 
as added by section 9015 (and amended by section 10906) 
of PPACA, including inserting a new clause (ii) in subpara- 
graph (A)\ 

(2) Estimated taxes. — Section 6654 of the Internal Rev- 
enue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating subsection (m) 
as subsection (n) and by inserting after subsection (1) the fol- 
lowing new subsection: 

"(m) Special Rule for Medicare Tax. — For purposes of this 
section, the tax imposed under section 3101(b)(2) (to the extent not 
withheld) shall be treated as a tax imposed under chapter 2.". 

(3) Effective date. — The amendments made by this sub- 
section shall apply with respect to remuneration received, and 
taxable years beginning after, December 31, 2012. 

SEC. 1403. DELAY OF LIMITATION ON HEALTH FLEXIBLE SPENDING 
ARRANGEMENTS UNDER CAFETERIA PLANS {AMEND- 
MENTS FULLY INCORPORATED INTO PPACA]. 

(a) In General. — [Amended section 10902(b) of PPACA] 

(b) Inflation Adjustment. — [Amended section 125(i)(2) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by section 9005 (and 
amended by section 10902) of PPACA] 

SEC. 1404. BRAND NAME PHARMACEUTICALS {AMENDMENTS FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED INTO PPACA]. 

(a) In General. — Section 9008 of the Patient Protection and 

Affordable Care Act is amended — 

June 9, 2010 



949 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



Sec. 1405 



(1) [Amended subsection (a)(1)] 

(2) [Amended subsection (r)(l) and added paragraph (4) to 
subsection (b)~\ 

(3) [Added a paragraph (3) to subsection (d)] 

(4) [Replaced subsection (j)] 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall take effect as if included in section 9008 of the Patient Protec- 
tion and Affordable Care Act. 

SEC. 1405. EXCISE TAX ON MEDICAL DEVICE MANUFACTURERS ISUB- 
STITUTES FOR SECTION 9009 OF PPACA\. 

[This section effectively substituted for section 9009 of PPACA, 
and is copied above.] 

(a) In General. — Chapter 32 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 is amended — 

(1) by inserting after subchapter D the following new sub- 
chapter: 

"Subchapter E — Medical Devices 

"Sec. 4191. Medical devices. 
"SEC. 4191. MEDICAL DEVICES. 

"(a) In General. — There is hereby imposed on the sale of any 
taxable medical device by the manufacturer, producer, or importer 
a tax equal to 2.3 percent of the price for which so sold. 

"(b) Taxable Medical Device. — For purposes of this section — 
"(1) In general. — The term 'taxable medical device' means 
any device (as defined in section 201(h) of the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act) intended for humans. 

"(2) Exemptions. — Such term shall not include — 
"(A) eyeglasses, 
"(B) contact lenses, 
"(C) hearing aids, and 

"(D) any other medical device determined by the Sec- 
retary to be of a type which is generally purchased by the 
general public at retail for individual use.", and 

(2) by inserting after the item relating to subchapter D in 
the table of subchapters for such chapter the following new 
item: 

"SUBCHAPTER E. MEDICAL DEVICES". 

(b) Certain Exemptions Not to Apply. — 

(1) Section 4221(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: 
"In the case of the tax imposed by section 4191, paragraphs (3), 
(4), (5), and (6) shall not apply.". 

(2) Section 6416(b)(2) of such Code is amended by adding 
at the end the following: "In the case of the tax imposed by sec- 
tion 4191, subparagraphs (B), (C), (D), and (E) shall not 
apply.". 

(c) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to sales after December 31, 2012. 

(d) Repeal of Section 9009 of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act. — [Repealed section 9009 of PPACA] . 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1406 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



950 



SEC. 1406. HEALTH INSURANCE PROVIDERS [AMENDMENT FULLY IN- 
CORPORATED INTO PPACA]. 

(a) In General. — Section 9010 of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act, as amended by section 10905 of such Act, is 
amended — 

(1) [Amended subsection (a)(l)~\ 

(2) [Amended subsection (b)(2), including adding subpara- 
graph (B)~\ 

(3) in subsection (c) — 

(A) [Inserted language] 

(B) [Amended paragraph (2) by substitute new sub- 
paragraphs (C) and (D) for subparagraphs (C) through 
(E)1 

(C) [Executed as if intended to amend sentence added 
by section added by section 10905(f)(3)~\ 

(D) [Added new paragraph (4)~\ 

(4) [Replaced subsection (e)~\ 

(5) [Added paragraphs (3) and (4) to subsection (g)~\ 

(6) [Replaced subsection (j)'J 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendments made by this section 
shall take effect as if included in section 9010 of the Patient Protec- 
tion and Affordable Care Act. 

SEC. 1407. DELAY OF ELIMINATION OF DEDUCTION FOR EXPENSES AL- 
LOCABLE TO MEDICARE PART D SUBSIDY [AMENDMENT 
FULLY INCORPORATED INTO PPACA]. 

[Amended section 9012(b) of PPACA] 

SEC. 1408. ELIMINATION OF UNINTENDED APPLICATION OF CEL- 
LULOSIC BIOFUEL PRODUCER CREDIT. 

(a) In General. — Section 40(b)(6)(E) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new 
clause: 

"(hi) Exclusion of unprocessed fuels. — The 
term 'cellulosic biofuel' shall not include any fuel if — 

"(I) more than 4 percent of such fuel (deter- 
mined by weight) is any combination of water and 
sediment, or 

"(II) the ash content of such fuel is more than 
1 percent (determined by weight).". 

(b) Effective Date. — The amendment made by this section 
shall apply to fuels sold or used on or after January 1, 2010. 

SEC. 1409. CODIFICATION OF ECONOMIC SUBSTANCE DOCTRINE AND 
PENALTIES. 

(a) In General. — Section 7701 of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986 is amended by redesignating subsection (o) as subsection 
(p) and by inserting after subsection (n) the following new sub- 
section: 

"(o) Clarification of Economic Substance Doctrine. — 

"(1) Application of doctrine. — In the case of any trans- 
action to which the economic substance doctrine is relevant, 
such transaction shall be treated as having economic substance 
only if — 

"(A) the transaction changes in a meaningful way 
(apart from Federal income tax effects) the taxpayer's eco- 
nomic position, and 

June 9, 2010 



951 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



Sec. 1409 



"(B) the taxpayer has a substantial purpose (apart 
from Federal income tax effects) for entering into such 
transaction. 

"(2) Special rule where taxpayer relies on profit po- 
tential. — 

"(A) In general. — The potential for profit of a trans- 
action shall be taken into account in determining whether 
the requirements of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of para- 
graph (1) are met with respect to the transaction only if 
the present value of the reasonably expected pre-tax profit 
from the transaction is substantial in relation to the 
present value of the expected net tax benefits that would 
be allowed if the transaction were respected. 

"(B) Treatment of fees and foreign taxes. — Fees 
and other transaction expenses shall be taken into account 
as expenses in determining pre-tax profit under subpara- 
graph (A). The Secretary shall issue regulations requiring 
foreign taxes to be treated as expenses in determining pre- 
tax profit in appropriate cases. 

"(3) State and local tax benefits. — For purposes of 
paragraph (1), any State or local income tax effect which is re- 
lated to a Federal income tax effect shall be treated in the 
same manner as a Federal income tax effect. 

"(4) Financial accounting benefits. — For purposes of 
paragraph (1)(B), achieving a financial accounting benefit shall 
not be taken into account as a purpose for entering into a 
transaction if the origin of such financial accounting benefit is 
a reduction of Federal income tax. 

"(5) Definitions and special rules. — For purposes of this 
subsection — 

"(A) Economic substance doctrine. — The term 'eco- 
nomic substance doctrine' means the common law doctrine 
under which tax benefits under subtitle A with respect to 
a transaction are not allowable if the transaction does not 
have economic substance or lacks a business purpose. 

"(B) Exception for personal transactions of indi- 
viduals. — In the case of an individual, paragraph (1) shall 
apply only to transactions entered into in connection with 
a trade or business or an activity engaged in for the pro- 
duction of income. 

"(C) Determination of application of doctrine not 
affected. — The determination of whether the economic 
substance doctrine is relevant to a transaction shall be 
made in the same manner as if this subsection had never 
been enacted. 

"(D) Transaction. — The term 'transaction' includes a 
series of transactions.", 
(b) Penalty for Underpayments Attributable to Trans- 
actions Lacking Economic Substance. — 

(1) In general. — Subsection (b) of section 6662 is amend- 
ed by inserting after paragraph (5) the following new para- 
graph: 

"(6) Any disallowance of claimed tax benefits by reason of 
a transaction lacking economic substance (within the meaning 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 1409 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



952 



of section 770 l(o)) or failing to meet the requirements of any 
similar rule of law.". 

(2) Increased penalty for nondisclosed trans- 
actions. — Section 6662 is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subsection: 

"(i) Increase in Penalty in Case of Nondisclosed Non- 
economic Substance Transactions. — 

"(1) In general. — In the case of any portion of an under- 
payment which is attributable to one or more nondisclosed 
noneconomic substance transactions, subsection (a) shall be ap- 
plied with respect to such portion by substituting '40 percent' 
for '20 percent'. 

"(2) Nondisclosed noneconomic substance trans- 
actions. — For purposes of this subsection, the term 'nondis- 
closed noneconomic substance transaction' means any portion 
of a transaction described in subsection (b)(6) with respect to 
which the relevant facts affecting the tax treatment are not 
adequately disclosed in the return nor in a statement attached 
to the return. 

"(3) Special rule for amended returns. — In no event 
shall any amendment or supplement to a return of tax be 
taken into account for purposes of this subsection if the amend- 
ment or supplement is filed after the earlier of the date the 
taxpayer is first contacted by the Secretary regarding the ex- 
amination of the return or such other date as is specified by 
the Secretary.". 

(3) Conforming amendment. — Subparagraph (B) of sec- 
tion 6662A(e)(2) is amended — 

(A) by striking "section 6662(h)" and inserting "sub- 
sections (h) or (i) of section 6662"; and 

(B) by striking "gross valuation misstatement pen- 
alty" in the heading and inserting "CERTAIN INCREASED 
UNDERPAYMENT PENALTIES". 

(c) Reasonable Cause Exception Not Applicable to Non- 
economic Substance Transactions. — 

(1) Reasonable cause exception for underpayments. — 
Subsection (c) of section 6664 is amended — 

(A) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as para- 
graphs (3) and (4), respectively; 

(B) by striking "paragraph (2)" in paragraph (4)(A), as 
so redesignated, and inserting "paragraph (3)"; and 

(C) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new 
paragraph: 

"(2) Exception. — Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any por- 
tion of an underpayment which is attributable to one or more 
transactions described in section 6662(b)(6).". 

(2) Reasonable cause exception for reportable trans- 
action understatements. — Subsection (d) of section 6664 is 
amended — 

(A) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as para- 
graphs (3) and (4), respectively; 

(B) by striking "paragraph (2)(C)" in paragraph (4), as 
so redesignated, and inserting "paragraph (3)(C)"; and 

June 9, 2010 



953 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



Sec. 1501 



(C) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new 
paragraph: 

"(2) Exception. — Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any por- 
tion of a reportable transaction understatement which is at- 
tributable to one or more transactions described in section 
6662(b)(6).". 

(d) Application of Penalty for Erroneous Claim for Re- 
fund or Credit to Noneconomic Substance Transactions. — 
Section 6676 is amended by redesignating subsection (c) as sub- 
section (d) and inserting after subsection (b) the following new sub- 
section: 

"(c) Noneconomic Substance Transactions Treated as 
Lacking Reasonable Basis. — For purposes of this section, any ex- 
cessive amount which is attributable to any transaction described 
in section 6662(b)(6) shall not be treated as having a reasonable 
basis.". 

(e) Effective Date. — 

(1) In general. — Except as otherwise provided in this sub- 
section, the amendments made by this section shall apply to 
transactions entered into after the date of the enactment of 
this Act. 

(2) Underpayments. — The amendments made by sub- 
sections (b) and (c)(1) shall apply to underpayments attrib- 
utable to transactions entered into after the date of the enact- 
ment of this Act. 

(3) Understatements. — The amendments made by sub- 
section (c)(2) shall apply to understatements attributable to 
transactions entered into after the date of the enactment of 
this Act. 

(4) Refunds and credits. — The amendment made by sub- 
section (d) shall apply to refunds and credits attributable to 
transactions entered into after the date of the enactment of 
this Act. 

SEC. 1410. TIME FOR PAYMENT OF CORPORATE ESTIMATED TAXES. 

The percentage under paragraph (1) of section 202(b) of the 
Corporate Estimated Tax Shift Act of 2009 in effect on the date of 
the enactment of this Act is increased by 15.75 percentage points. 

Subtitle F — Other Provisions 

SEC. 1501. community college and career training grant pro- 
gram. 

Section 279(b) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2372a(b)) is 
amended by striking "Supplement" and all that follows through 
"Funds" and inserting "There are" and by striking "pursuant" and 
all that follows and inserting "$500,000,000 for each of fiscal years 
2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014 to carry out this subchapter, except 
that the limitations contained in section 278(a)(2) shall not apply 
to such funds and each State shall receive not less than 0.5 percent 
of the amount appropriated pursuant to this subsection for each 
such fiscal year.". 

June 9, 2010 



Sec. 2301 



HEALTH RECONCILIATION 



954 



TITLE II— EDUCATION AND HEALTH 

Subtitle A — Education [Omitted From This 
Compilation} 

Subtitle B— Health 

SEC. 2301. INSURANCE REFORMS [AMENDMENTS FULLY INCORPORATED 
INTO PPACA\. 

(a) Extending Certain Insurance Reforms to Grand- 
fathered Plans. — [Adds a paragraph (4) to section 1251(a) of 
PPACA, as amended by section 101013(d) of PPACA] 

(b) Clarification Regarding Dependent Coverage. — 
[Amends section 2714(a) of the Public Health Service Act, as added 
by section 1001(5) of PPACA] 

SEC. 2302. DRUGS PURCHASED BY COVERED ENTITIES. 

Section 340B of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256b), 
as amended by sections 7101 and 7102 of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act, is amended — 

(1) in subsection (a) — 

(A) in paragraphs (1), (2), (5), (7), and (9), by striking 
the terms "covered drug" and "covered drugs" each place 
either term appears and inserting "covered outpatient 
drug" or "covered outpatient drugs", respectively; 

(B) in paragraph (4)(L) — 

(i) in clause (i), by striking "and" at the end; 

(ii) in clause (ii), by striking the period and insert- 
ing "; and"; and 

(iii) by inserting after clause (ii), the following: 
"(hi) does not obtain covered outpatient drugs 

through a group purchasing organization or other 
group purchasing arrangement."; and 

(C) in paragraph (5) — 

(i) by striking subparagraph (C); 

(ii) by redesignating subparagraphs (D) and (E) as 
subparagraphs (C) and (D), respectively; and 

(iii) in subparagraph (D), as so redesignated, by 
striking "subparagraph (D)" and inserting "subpara- 
graph (C)"; 

(2) by striking subsection (c); 

(3) in subsection (d) — 

(A) by striking "covered drugs" each place it appears 
and inserting "covered outpatient drugs"; 

(B) by striking "(a)(5)(D)" each place it appears and in- 
serting "(a)(5)(C)"; and 

(C) by striking "(a)(5)(E)" each place it appears and in- 
serting "(a)(5)(D)"; and 

(4) by inserting after subsection (d) the following: 

"(e) Exclusion of Orphan Drugs for Certain Covered En- 
tities. — For covered entities described in subparagraph (M), (N), or 
(O) of subsection (a)(4), the term 'covered outpatient drug' shall not 
include a drug designated by the Secretary under section 526 of the 